[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CPC Section 4: One of several palintiffs or defendants may obtain reversal of

whole decree where it proceeds on ground common to all.– Where there
are more plaintiffs or more defendants than one in a suit, and the decree
appealed from proceeds on any ground common to all the plaintiffs or to all the
defendants, any one of the plaintiffs or of the defendants may appeal from the
whole decree, and thereupon the Appellate Court may reverse or vary the
decree in favour of all the plaintiffs or defendants, as the case may be.
Stay of Preceeding and of Execution
5. Stay by Appellate Court.– (1) An appeal shall not operate as a stay of
proceedings under a decree or order appealed from except so far as the
Appellate Court may order, nor shall execution of a decree be stayed by reason
only of an appeal having been preferred from the decree; but the Appellate Court
may for sufficient cause order stay of execution of such decree.
(2) Stay by Court which passed the decree. Where an application is
made for stay of execution of an appealable decree before the expiration of the
time allowed for appealing therefrom, the Court which passed the decree may on
sufficient cause being shown order the execution to be stayed.
(3) No order for stay of execution shall be made under sub-rule (1) or
sub-rule(2) unless the Court making it is satisfied
__
a) that substantial loss may result to the party applying for stay of
execution unless the order is made;
b) that the application has been made without unreasonable delay; and
c) that security has been given by the applicant for the due
performance of such decree or order as may ultimately be binding
upon him.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule(3), the Court may
make an ex parte order for stay of execution pending the hearing of the
application.
6. Security in case of order for execution of decree appealed from.–
(1) Where an order is made for the execution of a decree from which an appeal
is pending, the Court which passed the decree shall, on sufficient cause being
shown by the appellant, require security to be taken for the restitution of any
property which may be or has been taken in execution of the decree or for the
payment of the value of such property and for the due performance of the decree
or order of the Appellate Court, or the Appellate Court may for like cause direct
the Court which passed the decree to take such security.
(2) Where an order has been made for the sale of immovable property
in execution of a decree, and an appeal is pending from such decree, the sale
shall, on the application of the judgment-debtor to the Court which made the
order, be stayed on such terms as to giving security or otherwise as the Court
thinks fit until the appeal is dispose of.
1
7. [No security to be required from the Government or a public officer in
certain cases.] Rep. by A.O. 1937.
1
See Order XXVII, rule 8A, supra.