[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://na.gov.pk/uploads/documents/6926e060076ed_467.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

Constitution Section 111: The Advocate-General

1
[and an Advisor appointed under
clause (11) of Article 130] shall have the right to speak and
otherwise take part in the proceedings of the Provincial Assembly
or any committee thereof of which he may be named a member,
but shall not by virtue of this Article be entitled to vote.
2
[112. (1) The Governor shall dissolve the Provincial Assembly if
so advised by the Chief Minister; and the Provincial Assembly
shall, unless sooner dissolved, stand dissolved at the expiration of
forty-eight hours after the Chief Minister has so advised.
Explanation.–Reference in this Article to ‘Chief Minister’
shall not be construed to include reference to a Chief Minister
against whom a notice of a resolution for a vote of no-confidence
has been given in the Provincial Assembly but has not been voted
upon or against whom a resolution for a vote of no-confidence
has been passed.
(2) The Governor may also dissolve the Provincial
Assembly in his discretion, but subject to the previous approval
Duration of
Provincial
Assembly.
Speaker and
Deputy
Speaker.
Summoning
and
prorogation of
Provincial
Assembly.
Right of
Governor to
address
Provincial
Assembly.
Right to speak
in Provincial
Assembly.
Dissolution of
Provincial
Assembly.
60                         CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amdt.) Act, 2024 (26 of 2024), s.6.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 37, for
“Article 112”.
of the President, where a vote of no-confidence having been
passed against the Chief Minister, no other member of the
Provincial Assembly commands the confidence of the majority of
the members of the Provincial Assembly in accordance with the
provisions of the Constitution, as ascertained in a session of the
Provincial Assembly summoned for the purpose.]
1
[113.The qualifications and disqualifications for membership of
the National Assembly set out in Articles 62 and 63 shall also
apply for membership of a Provincial Assembly as if reference
therein to “National Assembly” were a reference to “Provincial
Assembly”.]