[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/CrPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CrPC Section 144: Power to issue order absolute at once in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended

danger: (1)  in  cases  where,  in  the  opinion  of
1
[the Provincial  Government  or  its  authorized
officer   Deputy   Commissioner   or   District   Superintendent   of   Police] upon   the   written
recommendation  of  the  District  Superintendent  of  Police  or  Executive  District  Officer]  there  is
sufficient ground for proceeding under this section and immediate prevention or speedy remedy is
desirable.
2
[the Provincial  Government  or  its  authorized  officer  Deputy  Commissioner  or  District
Superintendent of Police] may, by a written order stating the material facts of the case and served
in manner provided by Section 134, direct any person to abstain from a certain act or take certain
order with certain property in his possession or under his management, if
3
[Provincial Government
or its authorized officer Deputy Commissioner or District Superintendent of Police] considers
that such direction is likely to prevent, or tends to prevent, obstruction, annoyance or injury, or risk
of  obstruction,  annoyance  or  injury,  to  any  person  lawfully  employed,  or  danger  to  human  life,
health or safety, or a disturbance of the public tranquility, or a riot, or an affray.
(2) An order under this section may, in cases of emergency or in cases where the circumstances do
not admit of the serving in due time of a notice upon the person against whom the order is directed,
be passed, ex-parte.
(3) An order under this section may be directed to a particular individual, or to the public generally
when frequenting or visiting a particular place.
(4) The
4
[Provincial Government or its authorized officer may, on its or his own motion] may,
either, on his own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, rescind or alter any order
made under this section by himself or by his predecessor-in-office.
(5) Where such an application is received, the
5
[Provincial Government or its authorized officer
it or he shall record in writing the reasons] shall afford to the applicant an early opportunity of
appearing before him either in person or by pleader and showing cause against the order; and, if the
6
[Provincial Government or its authorized officer it or he shall record in writing the reasons]
rejects the application wholly or in part, he shall record in writing his reasons for so doing.
(6) No order under this section shall remain in force for more than two [consecutive days and not
more than seven days in a month] from the making thereof; unless, in cases of danger to human
life,  health  or  safety,  or  a  likelihood  of  a  riot  or  an  affray,
7
[the  Provincial  Government  or  its
authorized officers] by notification in the official Gazette, otherwise directs.
(7)
8
[Omitted]
1
Subs by Sindh Act No.VI of 2018, S.2(a) dt,26
th
Feb,2018.
2
Subs by Sindh Act No.VI of 2018, S.2(b) dt,26
th
Feb,2018.
3
Ibid
4
Subs by Sindh Act No.VI of 2018, S.2(b) dt,26
th
Feb,2018.
5
Subs by Sindh Act No.VI of 2018, S.2(C) dt,26th Feb,2018.
6
Ibid
7
Subs by Sindh Act No.VI of 2018, S.2(d) dt,26th Feb,2018.
8
Omitted Sindh Act No.VI of 2018, S.2(e) dt,26th Feb,2018.
78
CHAPTER XII
DISPUTES AS TO IMMOVABLE PROPERTY
145. Procedure  where  dispute  concerning  land,  etc.,  is  likely  to  cause  breach
of  peace.  Whenever a
3
[Magistrate of the First Class] is satisfied from a police-report or other
information that  a dispute likely to cause a breach of the peace exists concerning any land or
water or the boundaries thereof, within the local limits of his jurisdiction, he shall make an order
in writing, stating the grounds of his being so satisfied, and requiring the parties concerned in
such  dispute  to  attend his Court in person  or  by  pleader,   within a time to  be  fixed  by  such
Magistrate,  and  to  put in written  statements  of  their  respective claims as  respects the  fact  of
actual possession of the subject of dispute.
(2) For the purposes of this section the expression "land or water" includes buildings, markets,
fisheries, crops or other produce of land, and the rents or profits of any such property.
(3) A  copy  of  the  order  shall  be  served in manner  provided  by  this Code  for  the  service  of  a
summons upon such person or persons as the Magistrate may direct, and at least one copy shall be
published by being affixed to some conspicuous place at or near the subject of dispute.
(4) Inquiry as to possession. The Magistrate shall then, without reference to the merits or the
claims of any of such parties to a right to possess the subject of dispute, peruse the statements so put
in,  hear the  parties,
3
[receive all such evidence as may be] produced by them respectively, consider
the  effect  of  such  evidence,  take  such  further  evidence (if any)  as  he  thinks  necessary,  and, if
possible,  decide  whether any  and which of the parties was at the date of the order before mentioned
in such possession of the said subject:
Provided that, if it appears to the Magistrate that any party has within two months next before
the  date        of  such  order  been  forcibly  and wrongfully dispossessed,  he  may  treat  the  party  so
dispossessed as if he had been in possession at such date:
Provided also, that if the Magistrate considers the case one of emergency, he may at any time
attach the subject of dispute, pending his decision under this section.
(5) Nothing in this section shall preclude any party so required to attend, or any other person
interested, from showing that no such dispute as aforesaid exists or has existed ; and in such case
the Magistrate shall cancel his said order, and all further proceedings thereon shall be stayed, but,
subject  to such cancellation,  the order of the Magistrate under sub-section (1) shall be final.
1
Added by Ord. 43 of 2001, ss. 4-5 (w.e.f 14-08-2001).
2
Subs. by Ord. 37 of 2001, s. 46 (w.e.f 14-08-2001).
3
Subs. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 28, for “receive the evidence”.
79
(6) Party in possession to retain possession until legally evicted. If the Magistrate decides that one
of the parties was
1
[or should under the first proviso to sub-section (4) be  treated as being]  in  such possession
of the said subject, he shall issue an order declaring such party to be entitled to possession thereof until evicted
therefrom in due course of law, and forbidding all disturbance of such possession until such eviction
1
[and when
he  proceeds  under  the first proviso  to  sub-section  (4),  may  restore  to  possession    the    party  forcibly  and
wrongfully dispossessed].
2
[(7) When any party to any such proceeding dies, the Magistrate may cause the legal representative of the
deceased party to be made a party to the proceeding and shall thereupon continue the inquiry, and if any question
arises as to who the legal representative of a deceased party for the  purpose  of such proceeding is, all persons
claiming to be representatives of the deceased party shall be made parties thereto.]
3
[(8) If the Magistrate is of opinion that any crop or other produce of the property, the subject of dispute in
a proceeding under this section pending before him, is subject to speedy and natural decay, he may make  an
order for the proper custody or sale of such property, and, upon the completion of the inquiry, shall make such
order for the disposal of such property , or the sale-proceeds thereof, as he thinks fit.
(9) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, at any stage of the proceedings under this section, on the application
of either party, issue a summons to any witness directing him to attend or to produce any document or thing.
(10) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to be in derogation of the powers of the Magistrate to proceed
under section 107.]
146. Power to attach subject of dispute. (1) If the Magistrate decides that none of the parties was
then in such possession, or is unable to satisfy himself  as to which of them was then in  such possession of  the
subject of dispute, he may attach it until a competent Court has determined the rights of the parties  thereto, or
the person entitled to possession thereof :
4
[Provided that
5
* * * the Magistrate who has attached the subject of dispute may withdraw the attachment
of any time if he is satisfied that there is no longer any likelihood of a breach of the peace in regard to the subject
of dispute.]
(2) When the Magistrate attaches the subject of dispute, he may,  if he thinks fit
4
[and if no receiver of  the
property, the subject of dispute, has been appointed by any Civil Court] appoint a receiver thereof, who, subject
to the control of the Magistrate, shall have all the powers of a receiver appointed under under the
6
[Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908] :
1
Ins. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 28.
2
Subs. ibid., for the original sub-section (7).
3
Sub-sections (8), (9) and (10) ins. ibid.
4
Ins. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 29.
5
Omitted by Ord. 37 of 2001, ss. 47-48 (w.e.f. 14-8-2001).
6
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972, (12 of 1972), s.2 and Sch., for “Code of Civil Procedure”.
80
1
[Provided  that,  in  the  event  of  a receiver  of  the  property,  the  subject  of  dispute,  being  subsequently
appointed by any Civil Court, possession shall be made over to him by the receiver appointed by the Magistrate,
who shall thereupon be discharged.]
2
[147. Disputes concerning rights of use of immovable  property, etc. (1) Whenever any
3
[Magistrate
of the First Class] is satisfied, from a police-report or other information, that a dispute likely to cause a breach
of the peace exists regarding any alleged right of user of any land or water as explained in section 145, sub-section
(2) (whether such rights be claimed as an easement or otherwise), within the local limits of his jurisdiction, he
may make an order in writing stating the grounds of his being so satisfied and requiring the parties concerned in
such dispute to attend the Court in person or by pleader within a time  to    be fixed by such Magistrate and to
put  in  writing statements  of  their  respective  claims,  and  shall  thereafter  inquire  into  the  matter in  the  manner
provided in  section 145, and the provisions of that section shall, as far  as may be, be applicable in the case of
such inquiry.
(1) If it appears to such Magistrate that such right exists, he may make an order prohibiting any
interference with the exercise of such right :
Provided that no such order shall be made where the right is exercisable at all times of the year, unless such
right has been exercised within three months next before the institution of the  inquiry,  or where  the  right is
exercisable only at particular seasons or on particular occasions, unless the right has been exercised during the
last of such seasons or on the last of such occasions before such institution.
(2) If it appears to such Magistrate that such right does not exist, he may make an order prohibiting any
exercise of the alleged right.
(3) An order under this section shall be subject to any subsequent decision of a Civil Court of competent
jurisdiction.]