[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://khalidzafar.com/wp-content/files_mf/1527158791QanuneShahadatOrder1984.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-14

QSO Section 102: Evidence of terms of contracts, grants and other disposition of property reduced to form of

documents. — When the terms of a contract, or of a grant, or of any other disposition of
property, have been reduced to the form of a document, and in all cases in which any matter is
required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, no evidence shall be given in proof of
the terms of such contract, grant or other disposition of property, or of such matter, except the
document itself, or secondary evidence of its contents in cases in which secondary evidence of
its contents in cases in which secondary evidence is admissible under the provisions
hereinbefore contained.
Exception 1. When a public officer is required by law to be appointed in writing, and when it is
shown that any particular person has acted as such officer, the writing by which he is appointed
need not be proved.
Exception 2. Wills admitted to probate in Pakistan may be proved by probate.
Explanation 1. This Article applies equally to cases in which the contracts, grants or dispositions
of property referred to are contained in one document and to cases in which they are contained
in more documents than one.
Explanation 2. Where there are more originals than one, are original only need be proved.
Explanation 3. The statement, in any document whatever, of a fact other than the facts referred
to in this Articles, shall not preclude the admission of oral evidence as to the same fact.
Illustrations
(a) If a contract be contained in several letters, all the letters in which it is contained must be
proved.
(b) If a contract is contained in a bill of exchange, the bill of ex change must be proved.
(c) If a bill of exchange is drawn in a set of three, one only need be proved.
(d) A contracts, in writing with B, for the delivery of indigo upon certain terms. The contract
mentions the fact that B had paid A the price of other indigo contracted for verbally on another
occasion.
Oral evidence is offered that no payment was made for the other indigo. The evidence is
admissible.
(e) A gives B a receipt for money paid by B. Oral evidence is offered of the payment. The
evidence is admissible.
COMMENTARY
Oral evidence relating to contents of documents was inadmissible.1
Exclusion of oral evidence by documentary evidence. Where payment of consideration was
evidence by document only that document would be considered as proof of such consideration
and no oral evidence would be admissible.2
103. Exclusion of evidence of oral agreement. When the terms of any such contract, grant or
other disposition of property, or any matter required by law to be reduced to the form of a
document, have been proved according to the last Article, no evidence of any oral agreement or
statement shall be admitted, as between the parties to any such instrument or their
representatives-in-interest, for the purpose of contradicting, varying adding to, or subtracting
from, its terms;
Proviso (1). Any fact may be proved which would invalidate any document, or which would
entitle any person to any decree or order relating thereto; such as fraud, intimidation, illegality,
want of due execution, want of capacity in any contracting party, want or failure of
consideration, or mistake in fact or law.
Proviso (2). The existence of any separate oral agreement as to an matter on which a
document is silent, and which is not inconsistent with its terms may be proved. In considering
whether or not to this proviso applies, the Court shall have regard to the degree of formality of
the document.
Proviso (3). The existence of any separate oral agreement,, constituting a condition precedent
to the attaching of any obligation under any such contract, grant or disposition of property, may
be proved.
Proviso (4). The existence of any distinct subsequent oral agreement to rescind or modify any
such contract, grant, or disposition of property, may be proved, except in case in which such
contract, grant or disposition or property is by law required to be in writing, or has been
registered according to the law inforce for the time being as to the registration of documents.
Proviso (5). Any usage of custom by which incidents not expressly mentioned in any contract
are usually annexed to contract of that description, may be proved:
Provided that the annexing of such incident would not be repugnant to, or inconsistent with,
the express terms of the contract.
Proviso (6). Any fact may be proved which shows in what manner the language of a document
is related to existing facts.
Illustrations
(a) A policy of insurance is effected on goods ―in ships from Karachi to London‖. The goods are
shipped in a particular ship which is last. The fact that particular ship was orally excepted from
the policy cannot be proved.
(b) A agrees absolutely in writing to pay B Rs. 1,000 on the first March, 1984. The fact that, at
the same time, an oral agreement was made that the money should not be paid till the thirty-
first March cannot be proved.
(c) An estate called ―the Khanpur estate‖ is sold by a deed which contains a map of the
property sold, the fact that land not included in the map had always been regarded as part of
the estate and was meant to pass by the deed cannot be proved.
(d) A enters into a written contract with B to work certain mines, the property of B, upon
certain terms. A was induced to do so by a misrepresentation of B‘s as to their value. This fact
may be proved.
(e) A institutes a suit against B for the specified performance of a contract and also prays that
the contract may be reformed as to one of its provisions, as that provisions was inserted in it by
mistake. A may prove that such a mistake was made as would by law entitle him to have the
contract reformed.
(f) A orders goods of B by letter in which nothing is said as to the time of payment, and accepts
the goods on delivery. B sues A for the price. A may show that the goods were supplied on
credit for a term still unexpired.
(g) A sells B a horse and verbally warrants him sound. A gives B a paper in these words
―Bought of A a horse for Rs.500‖. B may prove the verbal warranty.
(h) A hires lodging of B, and gives a card on which is written ―Rooms, Rs. 200 a month.‖ A may
prove a verbal agreement that these terms were to include partial board.
A hires lodging of B for a year, an regularly stamped agreement, drawn up by an advocate is
made between them. It is silent on the subject of board. A may not prove that board was
included in the terms verbally.
(i) A applies to B for a debt due to A by sending a receipt for the money. B keeps the receipt
and does not sent the money. In a suit for the amount A may prove this.
(j) A and B make a contract in writing to take effect upon the happening of a certain
contingency. The writing is left with B, who sues A upon it. A may show the circumstances
under which it was delivered.
COMMENTARY
Art. 103 — Exclusion of evidence of oral agreement — Party cannot be permitted to adduce oral
agreement or statement to contradict or vary the terms of proved agreement executed by
him.1a
Pre-emption suit. Compromise. Document of compromise was not stamped and element of
consideration was conspicuously missing in the same. Such document being not a contract,
grant, or other disposition of property reduced to the form of document to exclude evidence of
oral agreement within the contemplation of Art. 103. Qanun-e-Shahadat, case was not covered
by O.XXIII, R. 3, C.P.C.3
Pre-emption suit. Compromise. If the document is silent with regard to matter about which oral
agreement exists, then the same is allowed to be proved provided that same is not inconsistent
with the document.4
Liquidated damages. Omission in agreement to sell to describe property which was intended to
be sold. Such omission could validly be proved by oral evidence that specific property was
agreed to be sold. Parties to a document could show by other evidence that a writing executed
by them did not represent a completed transaction. Extrinsic evidence to determine the effort of
an instrument was permissible where there was doubt as to its true meaning. Conduct of
parties was admissible where a document was obscurely framed or any of its clauses contained
a doubt as to its true meaning. Courts below on basis of oral evidence had rightly decided that
defendant had been guilty of breach of contract and was liable for such breach to pay agreed
amount as damages.5
Agreement to sell. Document of. Whether oral evidence could be led to prove property which
was intended to be sole. Question of. No doubt Article 102 excludes extrinsic evidence in proof
of a contract, grant or other disposition of property. Under proviso (2) to Article 103, parties to
a document may show by other evidence that a writing executed by them does not represent a
completed transaction. Extrinsic evidence is also permissible to determine effect of an
instrument where its true meaning are doubtful. Held: Other evidence is admissible to prove
property which was intended to be sold but was omitted to be described in agreement. Petition
dismissed.6
104. Exclusion of evidence against application of document to existing facts. When language
used in a document is plain in itself, and when it applied accurately to existing acts, evidence
may not be given to show that it was not meant to apply to such facts.
Illustration
A sells to, by deed, ―my estate at Rangpur containing 100 bighas.‖ A has an estate at Rangpur
containing 100 bighas. Evidence may not be given of the fact that the estate meant to be sold
was not situated at the different place and of a different size.
105. Evidence as to document unmeaning in reference to existing facts. When language used in
a document in plain is itself, but is unmeaning in reference to existing facts, evidence may be
given to show that it was used in a peculiar sense.
Illustration
A sells to B, by deed ―my house in Karachi.‖
A had no house in Karachi, but it appears that he had a house at Keamari, of which B had been
in possession since the execution of the deed.
These facts may be proved to show that the deed related to the house at Keamari.