[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/CrPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CrPC Section 373: Court   of   Session   to   send   copy   of   finding   and   sentence   to

5
[officer-in-charge   of
prosecution]. In cases tried by the Court of Session, the Court shall forward a copy of its finding and sentence
(if any) to the
5
[officer-in-charge of prosecution in the district] within the local limits of whose Jurisdiction the
trial was held.
CHAIPTER XXVII
OF THE SUBMISSION OF SENTENCES FOR CONFIRMATION
374. Sentence  of  death  to  be  submitted  by  Court  of  Session. When  the  Court  of Session passes
sentence of death, the proceedings shall be submitted to the High Court and the sentence shall not be  executed
unless it is confirmed by the High Court.
375. Power to Direct  further inquiry to  be made or additional evidence  to  be  taken.-(1)  If
when  such  proceedings  are  submitted  the High Court  thinks  that  a  further  inquiry  should  be  made  into,    or
additional evidence taken upon, any point bearing upon the guilt or innocence  of the  convicted person, it may
make such inquiry or take such evidence itself, or direct it to be made or taken by the Court of Session.
6
[(2) Unless the High Court otherwise directs, the presence of the convicted person may be dispensed
with when such inquiry is made or such evidence is taken].
1
The words “on application” omitted, ibid.
2
Sub-section (1) subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972) s.2 and Sch.
3
Subs. by ord. 15 of 02, s.2.
4
Sub-section (2) omitted ibid.
5
Subs. by Ord. 37 of 2001, s.62 (w.e.f 14-08-2001).
6
Subs. ibid., for the original sub-section (2).
Page 142 of 319
(3) When the inquiry and the evidence (if any) are not made and taken by the High Court, the result of such
inquiry and the evidence shall be certified to such Court.
376. Power of High Court to confirm sentence or annul conviction. In any case submitted under
section 374,
1
*  *  * the High Court-
(a) may confirm the sentence, or pass any other sentence warranted by law, or
(b) may annul the conviction, and convict the accused of any offence of which the
Sessions Court might have convicted him, or order a new trial on the same or an amended
charge, or
(c) may acquit the accused person :
Provided  that  no  order  of  confirmation  shall  be  made  under  this  section  until  the  period  allowed  for
preferring an appeal has expired, or, if an appeal is presented within such period, until such  appeal  is disposed
of.
377. Confirmation of new  sentence to be signed by two Judges. In every case so submitted, the
confirmation of the sentence, or any new sentence, or order passed by the High  Court, shall,  when such  Court
consists of two or more judges, be made, passed and signed by at least two of them.
378. Procedure in case of difference of opinion. When any such case is heard before a  Bench  of
Judges and such Judges are equally divided in opinion, the case, will their opinions thereon, shall be laid before
another Judge, and such Judge, after such hearing as he thinks fit, shall deliver his opinion, and the judgment or
order shall follow such opinion.
379. Procedure  in  cases  submitted  to  High  Court for confirmation. In  cases  submitted  by  the
Court  of Session to the High Court for the confirmation of a  sentence  of death, the  proper officer of the  High
Court shall, without delay, after the order of confirmation or other order has been made by the High Court, send
a copy of the order, under the seal of the High  Court  and attested with his official signature, to the  Court of
Session.
2
[380. Procedure in cases submitted by Magistrate not empowered to act under section 562.
Where proceedings are submitted to a Magistrate of the first class or a Subdivisional Magistrate as provided by
section 562, such Magistrate may thereupon pass such sentence or make such order as he might have passed or
made if the case had originally been heard by him, and, if he thinks further inquiry or additional evidence  on
any point to be necessary, he may make such inquiry or take such evidence himself or direct such inquiry or
evidence to be made or traken.
1
The words “whether tried with the aid of assessors or by jury.” Omitted by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s.2 and sch.
2
Subs. by the Code of Criminal procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s.159, for the original entry.
Page 143 of 319
CHAPTER XXVIII
OF EXECUTION
381. Execution of order passed under section 376. When a sentence of death passed by a Court
of Session is submitted to the High Court for confirmation, such Court of Session shall, on receiving the
order of confirmation or other order of the High Court thereon, cause such order to be carried into effect
by issuing a warrant or taking such other steps as may be necessary
1
[:]
1
[Provided that the sentence of death shall not be executed if the heirs of the  deceased pardon  the
convict or enter into a compromise with him even at the last moment before execution of the sentence].
382. Postponement of capital sentence on  pregnant woman.  If a woman sentenced to death  is
found to be pregnant, the High  Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be postponed,  and
may, if it thinks fit, commute the sentence to
2
[imprisonment for life].
3
[382A. Postponement of execution of sentences of  imprisonment  under section  476  or for
a period of less than one year. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 383 or  391,  where the
accused
(a) is awarded any sentence of imprisonment under section 476, or
(b)  is sentenced  in cases  other  than  those  provided for in section 381,  to imprisonment
whether with or without fine or whipping, for a  period of less  than one  year,
the sentence shall not, if the accused furnishes bail to the satisfaction of the Court for his appearance
at such time and place as the Court may direct, be executed, until the  expiry  of the period prescribed
for making an appeal against such sentence, or, if an appeal is made within  that time, until the sentence
of imprisonment is confirmed by the Appellate  Court, but the sentence shall  be executed  as soon as
practicable after the  expiry  of  the  period  prescribed  for  making  an  appeal, or, in case of an appeal,
as soon as practicable after the receipt of the order of the Appellate Court confirming the sentence.
382B. Period of detention to be considered while awarding   sentence   of imprisonment. Where
a Court decides to pass a sentence of imprisonment on an accused for an offence, it
4
[shall] take into
consideration the period, if any, during which such accused was detained in custody for such offence.
1
Subs. and added by Act II of 1997, s.14.
2
Subs. by the Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1974 (25 of 1974), s.2 and Sch., for “transportation” (w.e.f 13.4.72)
3
Section 382-A, section 382-B and section 382-C ins. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972),s.2 and Sch.
4
Subs. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 1979 (71 of 1979), s. 2. for “may”.
Page 144 of 319
382-C. Scandalous  or  false  and  frivalous  pleas  to    be    considered    in    passing    sentence. In
passing  a  sentence  on an  accused for  any offence, a  Court may take  into  consideration  any
scandalous or false and frivolous plea taken in defence by him or on his behalf.]