[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 476: Counterfeiting  device  of  mark  used  for  authenticating,  documents  other  than  those

described in section 467, or possessing counterfeit marked material. Whoever counterfeits upon,
or in the  substance  of,  any  material,  any  device  or  mark  used  for  the  purpose  of  authenticating  any
document other than the documents described in section 467 of this Code, intending that such device
or mark shall be used for the purpose of giving the appearance of authenticity to any document then
forged or thereafter to be forged on such material, or who, with such intent, has in his possession any
material upon or in the substance of which any such device or mark has been counterfeited, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
477. Fraudulent  cancellation,  destruction,  etc.,  of  will,  authority  to  adopt,  or  valuable
security. Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent to cause damage or injury to the public or
to  any  person,  cancels,  destroys  or  defaces,  or  attempts  to  cancel,  destroy  or  deface,  or  secretes  or
attempts to secrete any document which is or purports to be a will, or an authority to adopt a son, or
any  valuable security, or commits  mischief in   respect  to  such  document,  shall  be  punished
with
l
[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
1
[477A. Falsification  of  accounts. Whoever,  being  a  clerk,  officer  or  servant,  or  employed  or
acting in the capacity of a clerk, officer or servant, wilfully, and with intent to defraud, destroys, alters,
mutilates or falsifies any book, paper, writing, valuable security or account which belongs to or is in the
possession of his employer, or has been received by him for or on behalf of his employer, or wilfully,
and with intent to defraud, makes or abets the making of any false entry in, or omits or alters or abets
the omission or alteration of any material particular from or in, any such book, paper, writing, valuable
security or account, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation. It shall be sufficient in any charge under this section to allege a general intent to
defraud  without naming any  particular person intended to  be defrauded or  specifying any  particular
sum of money intended to be the subject of the fraud, or any particular day on which the offence was
committed.]
Of Trade, Property and Other Marks
2
[
3
[478. Trade mark. A mark used for denoting that goods are the manufacture or merchandise of
a particular person is called a trade mark, and for the purpose of this Code the expression “trade mark”
includes any trade mark which is registered in the register of trade marks kept under the Trade Marks
Act, 1940 (V of 1940).].
479. Property  mark. A  mark  used  for  denoting  that  moveable  property belongs to  a  particular
person is called a property mark.
480. Using a false trade mark. Whoever marks any goods or any case, package or other receptacle
containing goods, or uses any case, package or other receptacle with any mark thereon, in a manner
reasonably calculated to cause it to be believed that the goods so marked, or any goods contained in
any such receptacle so marked, are the manufacture or merchandise of a person whose manufacture or
merchandise they are not, is said to use a false trade mark.
481. Using a false property mark. Whoever marks any moveable property or goods or any case,
package or other receptacle containing moveable property or goods, or uses any case, package or other
receptacle having any mark thereon, in a manner reasonably calculated to cause it to be believed that
the property or goods so marked, or any property or goods contained in any such receptacle so marked,
belong to a person to whom they do not belong, is said to use a false property mark.
482. Punishment for using a false trade-mark or property mark. Whoever uses any false trade
mark  or  any  false  property  mark shall, unless  he  proves  that  he acted without  intent  to  defraud,  be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine,
or with both.
483. Counterfeiting a trade mark or property mark used by another. Whoever counterfeits
any  trade  mark  or  property  mark  used  by  any  other  person  shall  be  punished with  imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
1
S. 477A ins. by the Criminal Law Amdt. Act, 1895 (3 of 1895), s. 4.
2
Ss. 478 to 489 were subs. by the Indian Merchandise Marks Act,1889 (4 of 1889), s. 3, for the original sections.
3
Subs. by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Ordinance, 1981 (27 of 1981), s. 3 and II Sch., for section 478.
484. Counterfeiting a mark used by a public servant. Whoever counterfeits any property mark
used by a public servant, or any mark used by a public servant to denote that any property has been
manufactured by a particular person or at a particular time or place, or that the property is of a particular
quality  or  has  passed  through  a  particular  office,  or  that it  is entitled  to  any  exemption,  or  uses  as
genuine any such mark knowing the same to  be counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.