[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://na.gov.pk/uploads/documents/6926e060076ed_467.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

Constitution Section 81: The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged

upon the Federal Consolidated Fund:–
(a)    the remuneration payable to the President and other
expenditure relating to his office, and the remuneration
payable to–
(i)    the Judges of
1
[the Federal Constiutional Court,] the
Supreme Court
2
[and the Islamabad High Court];
(ii)    the Chief Election Commissioner;
(iii)    the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman;
(iv)    the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the
National Assembly;
(v)    the Auditor-General;
3
[(b)    the administrative expenses, including the remunera-
tion payable to officers and
4
[staff], of
1
[the Federal
Constiutional Court,] the
5
[Supreme Court, the Judicial
Commission of Pakistan, the Supreme Judicial Council],
the department of the Auditor-General, the Office of the
Chief Election Commissioner and of the Election
Commission and the Secretariats of the Senate and the
National Assembly;]
(c)    all debt charges for which the Federal Government is
liable, including interest, sinking fund charges, the
repayment or amortisation of capital, and other
expenditure in connection with the raising of loans,
and the service and redemption of debt on the security
of the Federal Consolidated Fund;
(d)    any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or
award against Pakistan by any court or tribunal;
5
*
5
[(da)    any sums required to organize and conduct elections
to the National Assembly, Senate, Provincial Assemblies
and the local governments; and]
(e)    any other sums declared by the Constitution or by Act
of
6
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] to be so charged.
Expenditure
charged upon
Federal
Consolidated
Fund.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN                        47
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-Seventh Amdt.) Act, 2025 (32 of 2025), s. 9.
2
Added by the Constitution (Nineteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (1 of 2011), s. 2.
3
Subs. ibid.,for “paragraph (b)”.
4
Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-Second Amdt.) Act, 2016 (25 of 2016), s. 2, for
“servants”.
5
Subs.,omitted and ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amdt.) Act, 2024 (26 of 2024),
s.5.
6
See footnote 9 on page 5, supra.
82.   (1)    So much of the Annual Budget Statement as relates to
expenditure charged upon the Federal Consolidated Fund may be
discussed in, but shall not be submitted to the vote of, the
National Assembly.
(2)    So much of the Annual Budget Statement as relates to
other expenditure shall be submitted to the National Assembly in
the form of demands for grants, and the Assembly shall have
power to assent to, or to refuse to assent to, any demand, or to
assent to any demand subject to a reduction of the amount
specified therein:
Provided that, for a period of ten years from the
commencing day or the holding of the second general election to
the National Assembly, whichever occurs later, a demand shall be
deemed to have been assented to without any reduction of the
amount specified therein, unless, by the votes of a majority of the
total membership of the Assembly, it is refused or assented to
subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein.
(3)    No demand for a grant shall be made except on the
recommendation of the Federal Government.
83.   (1)    The Prime Minister shall authenticate by his signature
a schedule specifying–
(a)    the grants made or deemed to have been made by
the National Assembly under Article 82; and
(b)    the several sums required to meet the expendi-
ture charged upon the Federal Consolidated
Fund but not exceeding, in the case of any sum,
the sum shown in the statement previously laid
before the National Assembly.
(2)    The schedule so authenticated shall be laid before the
National Assembly, but shall not be open to discussion or vote
thereon.
(3)    Subject to the Constitution, no expenditure from the
Federal Consolidated Fund shall be deemed to be duly authorized
unless it is specified in the schedule so authenticated and such
schedule is laid before the National Assembly as required by
clause (2).
Procedure
relating to
Annual Budget
Statement.
Authentication
of schedule of
authorized
expenditure.
48                         CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN