[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/CrPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CrPC Section 165: Search by police-officer

1
[(1) Whenever an officer in charge of a police-station or a  police-
officer making an investigation has reasonable grounds for believing that anything necessary for  the  purposes
of an investigation into any offence which he is authorised to investigate may be  found in  any  place within
the limits of the police-station of which he is in charge, or to which he is attached, and that such thing cannot in
his opinion be otherwise obtained without undue delay, such officer may, after recording in writing the grounds
of his belief and specifying in such writing, so far as possible, the thing for which search  is to be made, search,
or cause search to be made, for such thing in any place within the limits of such station.[:]
2
3
[Provided that no such officer shall search, or cause search to be made, for anything which is in the custody
of a bank or banker as defined in the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 (XVIII of 1891) and  relates, or might
disclose any information which relates, to the bank account of any person except,
(a) for the purpose of investigating an offence  under sections 403, 406, 408 and 409 and sections  421
to 424 (both inclusive) and sections 465 to 477A (both inclusive) of the Pakistan Penal Code, with
the prior permission in writing of a Sessions Judge; and
(b) in other cases, with the prior permission in writing of the High Court.]
(2) A police-officer proceeding under sub-section (1) shall, if practicable, conduct the search in person.]
(3) If he is unable to conduct the search in person, and there is no other person competent to make the search
present at the time, he may
4
[after recording in writing his reasons for so doing] require any officer subordinate
to him to make the search, and he shall deliver to such subordinate officer an order in writing
5
[specifying the
place to be searched and, so far as possible, the thing for which search is to be made]; and such subordinate
officer may thereupon search for such thing in such place.
1
Subs. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 36, for the original sub-sections (1) and (2).
2
Subs. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1968 (3 of 1968), s. 3, for full-stop (w.e.f. 21.5.68).
3
Proviso added ibid.
4
Ins., by Act, 18 of 1923, s. 36.
5
Subs. ibid., for “specifying the document or thing for which search is to be made and the place to be searched”.
89
(4) The provisions of this Code as to search-warrants
1
[and the general provisions as to searches
contained in section 102 and section 103] shall, so far may be, apply to a search made under this section.
2
[(5)  Copies  of  any  record  made  under  sub-section  (1)  or  sub-section  (3)  shall  forthwith  be  sent  to  the
nearest Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence and the owner or occupier of the place searched
shall on application be furnished with a copy of the same by the Magistrate:
Provided that he shall pay for the same unless the Magistrate for some special reason thinks fit to furnish it
free of cost.]
166. When officer in charge of police-station may require another to issue search warrant. (1) An
officer in charge of a police-station
3
[or a police-officer not being below the rank of sub-inspector making an
investigation]  may require  an  officer  in  charge  of  another  police-station,  whether  in  the  same  or  a  different
district, to cause a search to be made in any place, in any case in which the former officer might cause such
search to be made, within the limits of his own station.
(2) Such officer, on being so required, shall proceed according to the provisions of section 165, and shall
forward the thing found, if any, to the officer at whose request the search was made.
4
[(3) Whenever there is reason to believe that the delay occasioned by requiring an officer in charge of
another  police-station  to  cause  a  search  to  be  made  under  sub-section  (1) might result in evidence  of  the
commission of  an  offence  being  concealed  or  destroyed, it shall  be  lawful  for  an  officer in charge  of  a
police-station or a police-officer making an investigation under this Chapter to search, or cause to be searched,
any place in the limits of another police-station, in accordance with the provisions of section 165,   as if such
place were within the limits of his own station.
(4) Any officer conducting a search under sub-section (3) shall forthwith send notice of the search to the
officer in charge of the police-station within the limits of which such place is situate, and shall also send with
such notice a copy of the list (if any) prepared under section 103, and shall also send to  the  nearest Magistrate
empowered to take cognizance of the offence, copies of the records referred to in section 165, sub-sections (1)
and (3).
(5) The owner or occupier of the place searched shall, on application, be furnished with a copy of any record
sent to the Magistrate under sub-section (4):
Provided that he shall pay for the same unless the Magistrate for some special reason thinks fit to furnish it
free of cost.]
1
Subs. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1968 (3 of 1968), s. 3, for full-stop (w.e.f. 21-5-1968).
2
Ins., by Act, 18 of 1923, s.36.
3
Ins. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 37.
4
Sub-Sections (3) to (5) were added ibid.
90