[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 508: Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be rendered an object of the Divine

displeasure. Whoever voluntarily causes or attempts to cause any person to do anything which that
person is not legally bound to do or to omit to do anything which he is legally entitled to do, by inducing
or attempting to induce that person to believe that he or any person in whom he is interested will become
or will be rendered by some act of the offender an object of Divine displeasure if he does not do the
thing which it is the object of the offender to cause him to do, or if he does the thing which it is the
object of the offender to cause him to omit shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration
(a) A sits dhurna at Z’s door with the intention of causing it to be believed that, by so sitting,
he renders Z an object of Divine displeasure. A has committed the offence defined in this
section.
(b) A  threatens  Z  that,  unless  Z  performs  a  certain act, A will kill one  of A’s own  children,
under such circumstances that the killing would be believed to render Z an object of Divine
displeasure. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
2
[509. Insulting modesty or causing sexual harassment.
Whoever,
(i) intending to insult the modesty of any woman, utters any word, makes any sound or gesture,
or exhibits any object, intending that such word or sound shall be heard, or that such gesture
or object shall be seen, by such woman, or intrudes upon the privacy of such woman;
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for "Transportation".
2
Subs. by Act I of 2010, s. 2.
(ii) conduct  sexual advances, or demand sexual  favors or uses verbal or non-verbal
communication or physical conduct of a sexual nature which intends to annoy, insult,
intimitate or threaten the other person or commits  such  acts  at  the premises of
workplace, or makes submission to such conduct either explicitly or implicitly a term
or condition of an individuals employment, or makes submission to or rejection of such
conduct by an individual a basis for employment decision affecting such individual, or
retaliates because of rejection of such behaviour, or conducts such behaviour with the
intention of unreasonably interfering with an individual’s work performance or creating
an intimidating , hostile, or offensive working environment;
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine up to five
hundred thousand rupees or with both.
Explanation 1.
__
Such behaviour might occur in public place, including, but not limited to,
markets, public  transport,  streets or parks, or it might occur  in  private places including,  but  not
limited to workplaces, private gathering, or homes.
Explanation 2.
__
Workplace means, the place of work or the premises where an organization
or employer operates, this may be a specific building, factory, open area or a larger geographical
area where the  activities of the  organization of carried out. Sexual advances may occur  after
working  hours and outside  workplace. It is  the access  that perpetrator has to  the  person being
harassed by virtue of a job situation or job related functions and activities.].
510. Misconduct in public by a drunken person. Whoever, in a state of intoxication appears in
any public place, or in any place which it is a trespass in him to enter, and there conducts himself
in such a manner as to cause annoyance to any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment
for  a  term which  may extend to  twenty-four  hours, or with fine which may extend to
1
[thirty]
rupees, or with both.
__________
CHAPTER XXIII
OF ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENCES