[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://na.gov.pk/uploads/documents/63ea176f52421_610.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

Constitution Section 270B: Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution,

the   elections   held   under   the   Houses   of   (Parliament)   and
Provincial Assemblies (Elections) Order, 1977,
1
[and the Conduct
of General Elections Order, 2002 (Chief Executive’s Order No. 7
of 2002),] to the Houses and the Provincial Assemblies shall be
deemed to have been held under the Constitution and shall have
effect accordingly.
2
[270BB. Notwithstanding   anything   contained   in   the
Constitution, or any other law for the time being in force, the
General   Elections   2008,   to   the   National   Assembly   and   the
Provincial Assemblies held on the eighteenth day of February,
two thousand and eight shall be deemed to have been held under
the Constitution and shall have effect accordingly.].
3
270 C.[Omitted.]
4
[271.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution,
but subject to
5
[Article 63,] Article 64 and Article 223,––
6
[(a) the first National Assembly shall consist of––
(i) persons   who   have   taken   oath   in   the   National
Assembly   of   Pakistan   existing   immediately
before the commencing day ; and
1
Ins. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 97, and shall be
deemed always to have been so, ins. with effect from the 21st day of August 2002.
2
New Article 270BB Ins., ibid., s. 98.
3
Article 270C stands omitted as a consequence of the (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of
2010), see section 2 and Article 270AA.
4
Article 271 shall, during the period of five years from the 27th October, 1973, have effect
as if,–
(a) after clause (2) thereof, the following new clause was ins. namely:–
‘‘(2A) A person referred to in clause (2) shall resign one of his seats at any time
on or before the 10th day of November, 1973, and, if he does not so resign, the
seat to which he was elected first shall become vacant.’’; and
(b) in clause (3) thereof, after the words ‘‘election petition’’, the words ‘‘or other-
wise’’   were   inserted, seethe   Removal   of   Difficulties   (Bar   against   Double
Membership) Order, 1973 (P. O. No. 22 of 1973).
5
Ins. by the Constitution (Fourth Amdt.) Act, 1975 (71 of 1975), s. 9, (w.e.f.the 21st
November,  1975).
6
Subs. ibid.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN165
(ii) the persons to be elected in accordance with law
by the members of the Assembly to fill the seats
referred to in clause (2A) of Article 51,
and, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue until the fourteenth
day of August, one thousand nine hundred and seventy-seven;
and reference to ‘total membership’ of National Assembly in the
Constitution shall be construed accordingly;]
(b) the   qualifications   and   disqualifications   for   being
elected   and   being   a   member   of   the   first   National
Assembly   shall,   except   in   case   of   members   filling
casual vacancies
1
[, or to be elected to the additional
seats referred to in clause (2A) of Article 51,] after the
commencing day, be the same as under the Interim
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:
Provided that no person holding an office of profit in the
service of Pakistan shall continue to be a member of the first
National Assembly after the expiration of three months from the
commencing day.
(2) If a person referred to in paragraph (a) of clause (1) is,
immediately   before   the   commencing   day,   also   a   member   of   a
Provincial Assembly, he shall not take a seat in the National Assembly
or the Provincial Assembly until he resigns one of his seats.
(3) A casual vacancy in a seat in the first National Assembly,
including a vacancy in a seat in the National Assembly of Pakistan
existing before the commencing day which was not filled before
that day, caused by reason of death or resignation of a member or
consequent upon his incurring a disqualification or ceasing to be a
member as a result of the final decision of an election petition may be
filled in the same manner in which it would have been filled before
the commencing day.
(4) A person referred to in paragraph (a) of clause (1)
shall not sit or vote in the National Assembly until he has made
the oath prescribed by Article 65 and, if, without the leave of the
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Ins. by the Constitution (Fourth Amdt.) Act, 1975 (71 of 1975), s. 9, (w.e.f.the 21st
November, 1975).
166CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
Speaker of the National Assembly granted on reasonable cause
shown, he fails to make the oath within twenty one days from the
day of the first meeting of the Assembly, his seat shall become
vacant at the expiration of that period.
1
272.
3
*Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution,
but subject to
4
[Article 63 and] Article 223,–
(a) the   Senate   shall,   until   the   first   National Assembly
under Constitution continues in existences, consist of
forty-five members and the provisions of Article 59
shall have effect as if, in paragraph (a) of clause (1)
thereof, for the word “fourteen” the word “ten” and in
paragraph (b) of that clause for the word “five” the
word “three”, were substituted, and reference to “total
membership” of the Senate in the Constitution shall be
construed accordingly;
(b) the members elected or chosen as members of the
Senate shall be divided into two groups by drawing of
lots, the first group consisting of five members from
each   Province,   two   members   from   the   Federally
Administered Tribal Areas and one member from the
Federal Capital and the second group consisting of
five members from each Province one member from
the   said Areas   and   one   member   from   the   Federal
Capital;
First
2
[Constitu-
tion of]
Senate.
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Article 272 had, between the 9th June, 1973, and the 14th August, 1974, effect sub-
ject to the following modifications made by the Election to the Senate Order, 1973 (P.O.
No. 8 of 1973), namely:–
In   the   said   Article,   after   clause   (1),   the   following   new   clause   shall   be   added,
namely:–
‘‘(2)  Until Parliament by law makes provision in that behalf, the President may, for
the purpose of the due Constitution of, and election to, the Senate, by Order,
make provision for any of the matters referred to in–
(a)  Paragraphs (d) and (e) of clause (1) of Article 63;
(b) Paragraphs (d), (e) and (f) of Article 222; and
(c) Article 225.’’.
2
Ins. by the Constitution (First Amdt.) Act, 1974 (33 of 1974), s. 16, (w.e.f.the 4th
May, 1974).
3
The brackets and figure ‘‘(1)’’ omitted by the Constitution (Fourth Amdt.) Act, 1975
(71 of 1975), s. 10, (w.e.f. 21st November, 1975).
4
Ins. ibid.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN167
(c) the term of office of members of the first group and of
the second group shall respectively be two years and
four years;
(d) the term of office of persons elected or chosen to
succeed the members of the Senate at the expiration of
their respective terms shall be four years;
(e) the term of office of a person elected or chosen to fill
a casual vacancy shall be the unexpired term of the
member whose vacancy he is elected or chosen to fill;
(f) as soon as the first general election to the National
Assembly is held, there shall be elected to the Senate
four additional members from each Province and two
additional members from the Federally Administered
Tribal Areas; and
(g) the term of office of such half of the members elected
under paragraph (f) as may be determined by drawing
of lots shall be the unexpired term of office of the
members of the first group and the term of office of
the other half shall be the unexpired term of the mem-
bers of the second group.
1
273.(1)   Notwithstanding   anything   contained   in   the
Constitution, but subject to
2
[Article 63,] Article 64 and Article
223,–
3
[(a) the   first   Assembly   of   a   Province   under   the
Constitution shall consist of–
(i) the members of the Assembly of that Province in
existence immediately before the commencing
day, and
First
Provincial
Assembly.
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Article 273 shall, during the period of five years from the 27th October, 1973, have
effect as if, in clause (2) thereof, after the words ‘‘elections petitions’’, the words ‘‘or oth-
erwise’’ were ins. see.the Removal of Difficulties (Bar against Double Membership)
Order, 1973 (P.O. No. 22 of 1973).
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Fourth Amdt.) Act, 1975 (71 of 1975), s. 11, (w.e.f.the 21st
November, 1975).
3
Subs. ibid.,(w.e.f.the 21st November, 1975).
168CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
(ii) the additional members to be elected in accor-
dance with law by the members of the Assembly
to fill the seats referred to in clause (3) of Article
106,
and, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue until the
fourteenth day of August, one thousand nine hundred
and seventy-seven ; and reference ''total membership''
of the Assembly of a Province in the Constitution shall
be construed accordingly;]
(b) the qualifications and disqualifications for member-
ship of the first Assembly of a Province shall, except
in case of members filling casual vacancies
1
[, or to be
elected to the additional seats referred to in clause (3)
of Article 106,] after the commencing day, be the same
as were provided in the Interim Constitution of the
Islamic Republic of Pakistan :
Provided that no person holding an office of profit in the
service   of   Pakistan   shall   continue   to   be   a   member   of   the
Assembly after the expiration of three months from the com-
mencing day.
(2) A casual vacancy in a seat in the first Assembly of a
Province, including a vacancy in a seat in the Assembly of that
Province in existence immediately before the commencing day
which was not filled before that day, caused by reason of death or
resignation of a member or consequent upon his incurring a
disqualification or ceasing to be a member as a result of the final
decision of an election petition may be filled in the same manner
in which it would have been filled before the commencing day.
(3) A member referred to in paragraph (a) of clause (1)
shall not sit or vote in the Provincial Assembly until he has made
the oath prescribed by Article 65 read with Article 127 and, if,
without leave of the Speaker of the Provincial Assembly granted
on reasonable cause shown,  he  fails  to  make  the  oath  within
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Ins. by the Constitution (Fourth Amdt.) Act, 1975 (71 of 1975), s. 11, (w.e.f. the 21st
November, 1975).
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN169
twenty-one days from the day of the first meeting of the
Provincial Assembly, his seat shall become vacant at the expira-
tion of that period.
274.(1) All property and assets which, immediately before the
commencing day, were vested in the President or the Federal
Government shall, as from that day, vest in the Federal
Government unless they were used for purposes which, on that
day, became purposes of the Government of a Province, in which
case they shall, as from that day, vest in the Government of the
Province.
(2) All property and assets which, immediately before the
commencing day, were vested in the Government of a Province,
shall, as from that day, continue to be vested in the Government
of that Province, unless they were used for purposes, which on
that day, became purposes of the Federal Government in which
case they shall, as from that day, vest in the Federal Government.
(3) All rights, liabilities and obligations of the Federal
Government or of the Government of a Province, whether arising
out of contract or otherwise, shall as from the commencing day,
continue to be respectively the rights, liabilities and obligations
of the Federal Government or of the Government of the Province,
except that –
(a) all rights, liabilities and obligations relating to any
matter which, immediately before that day, was the
responsibility of the Federal Government, but which
under the Constitution, has become the responsibility
of the Government of a Province, shall devolve upon
the Government of that Province; and
(b) all rights, liabilities and obligations relating to any
matter which, immediately before that day, was the
responsibility of the Government of a Province, but
which under the Constitution, has become the respon-
sibility of the Federal Government, shall devolve upon
the Federal Government.
Vesting of
property,
assets, rights,
liabilities and
obligations.
275.(1) Subject to the Constitution and until law is made under
Article 240 any person who, immediately before the commenc-
ing day, was in the service of Pakistan shall, as from that day,
continue in the service of Pakistan on the same terms and
conditions as were applicable to him under the Interim
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan immediately
before that day.
(2) Clause (1) shall also apply in relation to a person hold-
ing office immediately before the commencing day as –
(a) Chief Justice of Pakistan or other Judge of the
Supreme Court, or Chief Justice or other Judge of a
High Court;
(b) Governor of a Province;
(c) Chief Minister of a Province;
(d) Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly
or a Provincial Assembly;
(e) Chief Election Commissioner;
(f) Attorney-General for Pakistan or Advocate-General
for a Province; and
(g) Auditor-General of Pakistan.
(3) Notwithstanding   anything   contained   in   the
Constitution, for a period of six months from the commencing
day, a Federal Minister or a Minister of State or the Chief
Minister of a Province or a Provincial Minister may be a person
who is not a member of
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] or, as the
case may be, the Provincial Assembly of that Province; and such
Chief Minister and Provincial Minister shall have the right to
speak and otherwise take part in the proceedings of the Provincial
Assembly or any committee thereof of which he may be named
a   member,   but   shall   not   by   virtue   of   this   clause   be
entitled to vote.
Continuance in
office of
persons in
service of
Pakistan, etc.
170CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
See footnote 9 on page 5, supra.
(4) Any person who, under this Article, is continued in an
office in respect of which a form of oath is set out in the third
Schedule shall, as soon as is practicable after the commencing
day make before the appropriate person oath in that form.
(5) Subject to the Constitution and law–
(a) all civil, criminal and revenue courts exercising
jurisdiction and functions immediately before the
commencing day shall, as from that day, continue to
exercise their respective jurisdictions and functions;
and
(b) all authorities and all offices (whether judicial,
executive, revenue or ministerial) throughout Pakistan
exercising   functions   immediately   before   the
commencing day shall, as from that day, continue to
exercise their respective functions.
276.Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, the
first President may, in the absence of the Chief Justice of
Pakistan, make the oath referred to in Article 42 before the
Speaker of the National Assembly.
277.(1) The schedule or authorized expenditure authenticated by
the President for the financial year ending on the thirtieth day of
June, one thousand nine hundred and seventy-four, shall
continue to remain a valid authority for expenditure from the
Federal Consolidated Fund for that year.
(2) The President may, in respect of expenditure of the
Federal Government for any financial year preceding the
financial year commencing on the first day of July, one thousand
nine hundred and seventy-three (being expenditure in excess of
the   authorized   expenditure   for   that   year),   authorize   the
withdrawal of moneys from the Federal Consolidated Fund.
(3) The provisions of clauses (1) and (2) shall apply to
and in relation to a Province, and for that purpose–
(a) any reference in those provisions to the President shall
be read as a reference to the Governor of the Province;
Oath of first
President.
Transitional
financial,
provisions.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN171
(b) any reference in those provisions to the Federal
Government shall be read as a reference to the
Government of the Province; and
(c) any reference in those provisions to the Federal
Consolidated Fund shall be read as a reference to the
Provincial Consolidated Fund of the Province.
278.The Auditor-General shall perform the same functions and
exercise the same powers in relation to accounts which have not
been completed or audited before the commencing day as, by
virtue of the Constitution, he is empowered to perform or
exercise in relation to other accounts, and Article 171 shall, with
the necessary modifications, apply accordingly.
279.Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, all
taxes and fees levied under any law in force immediately before
the commencing day shall continue to be levied until they are
varied or abolished by Act of the appropriate Legislature.
280.The Proclamation of Emergency issued on the twenty-third
day of November, one thousand nine hundred and seventy-one,
shall be deemed to be a Proclamation of Emergency issued under
Article 232, and for the purposes of clause (7) and clause (8)
thereof to have been issued on the commencing day, and any law,
rule or order made or purporting to have been made in pursuance
of that Proclamation shall be deemed to have been validly made
1
[and shall not be called in question in any Court on the ground
of inconsistency with any of the rights conferred by Chapter I of
Part II.]
_____
Accounts not
audited before
commencing
day.
Continuance
of taxes.
Continuance of
Proclamation
of Emergency.
172CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
________________________________________________________________
1
Added and shall be deemed always to have been so added by the Constitution (Fifth
Amdt.) Act, 1976 (62 of 1976), s. 17.
1
[ANNEX
(Article 2A)
The Objectives Resolution
(In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent,
the most merciful.)
Whereas sovereignty over the entire universe belongs to
Allah Almighty alone and the authority which He has delegated
to the State of Pakistan, through its people for being exercised
within the limits prescribed by Him is a sacred trust;
This Constituent Assembly representing the people of
Pakistan resolves to frame a Constitution for the sovereign
independent State of Pakistan;
Wherein the State shall exercise its powers and authority
through the chosen representatives of the people;
Wherein the principles of democracy, freedom, equality,
tolerance and social justice as enunciated by Islam shall be fully
observed;
Wherein the Muslims shall be enabled to order their lives in
the individual and collective spheres in accordance with the
teachings and requirements of Islam as set-out in the Holy Quran
and the Sunnah;
Wherein adequate provision shall be made for the minorities
to
2
[freely] profess and practise their religions and develop their
cultures;
Wherein the territories now included in or in accession with
Pakistan and such other territories as may hereafter be included in
or accede to Pakistan shall form a Federation wherein the units will
be autonomous with such boundaries and limitations on their
powers and authority as may be prescribed;
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN173
________________________________________________________________
1
New Annex ins. by P.O. No. 14 of 1985, Art. 2 and Sch.
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010(10 of 2010), s. 99.
Wherein shall be guaranteed fundamental rights including
equality of status, of opportunity and before law, social, economic
and political justice, and freedom of thought, expression, belief,
faith, worship and association, subject to law and public morality;
Wherein adequate provision shall be made to safeguard the
legitimate interests of minorities and backward and depressed
classes;
Wherein the independence of the Judiciary shall be fully
secured;
Wherein the integrity of the territories of the Federation, its
independence and all its rights including its sovereign rights on
land, sea and air shall be safeguarded;
So that the people of Pakistan may prosper and attain their
rightful and honoured place amongst the nations of the World and
make their full contribution towards international peace and
progress and happiness of humanity.]
–––––
174CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
1
[FIRST SCHEDULE
[Article 8(3) (b) and (4)]
Laws exempted from the operation of Article 8 (1) and (2).
PART I
I. President’s Orders
1. The Acceding State (Property) Order, 1961 (P. O. No. 12 of
1961).
2. The Economic Reforms Order, 1972 (P. O. No. 1 of 1972).
II. Regulations