[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 256: Having  possession  of instrument  or  material  for  counterfeiting  Government  stamp

Whoever has in his possession any instrument or material for the purpose of being used, or knowing or
having reason to believe that it is intended to be used, for the purpose of counterfeiting any stamp issued
by Government for the purpose of revenue, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
257. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Government stamp. Whoever makes or
performs  any  part  of  the  process  of making, or  buys,  or sells, or  disposes  of,  any  instrument  for  the
purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended to be used, for the
purpose  of  counterfeiting  any  stamp issued by  Government  for  the  purpose  of  revenue,  shall  be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and shall
also be liable to fine.
258. Sale of counterfeit Government stamp. Whoever sells, or offers for sale, any stamp which
he knows or has reason to believe to be a counterfeit of any stamp issued by Government for the purpose
of revenue, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
259. Having possession of counterfeit  Government stamp. Whoever has in his possession any
stamp  which  he  knows  to  be  a  counterfeit  of  any  stamp issued by  Government  for  the  purpose  of
revenue, intending to use, or dispose of the same as a genuine stamp, or in order that it may be used
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
as a genuine stamp, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
260. Using as genuine a Government stamp known to be counterfeit. Whoever uses as genuine
any  stamp,  knowing it to  be  a  counterfeit  of  any  stamp issued by  Government  for  the  purpose  of
revenue,  shall  be  punished with  imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to
seven years, or with fine, or with both.