[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://na.gov.pk/uploads/documents/6926e060076ed_467.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

Constitution Section 127: Subject to the Constitution, the provisions of clauses (2) to

(8) of Article 53, clauses (2) and (3) of Article 54, Article 55,
Articles 63 to 67, Article 69, Article 77, Article 87 and Article 88
shall apply to and in relation to a Provincial Assembly or a
committee or members thereof or the Provincial Government, but
so that –
(a)    any reference in those provisions to
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora
(Parliament)], a House or the National Assembly shall
be read as a reference to the Provincial Assembly;
(b)    any reference in those provisions to the President shall
be read as a reference to the Governor of the Province;
(c)    any reference in those provisions to the Federal
Government shall be read as a reference to the
Provincial Government;
(d)    any   reference   in   those   provisions   to   the
Prime Minister shall be read as a reference to the
Chief Minister ;
(e)    any reference in those provisions to a Federal Minister
shall be read as a reference to a Provincial Minister;
2
*
(f)    any reference in those provisions to the National
Assembly of Pakistan shall be read as a reference
to the Provincial Assembly in existence immediately
before the commencing day
3
[; and]
4
[(g)    the said clause (2) of Article 54 shall have effect as if,
in the proviso thereto, for the words “one hundred and
thirty” the words
5
[one hundred] were substituted.]
Ordinances
128. (1) The   Governor   may,   except   when   the   Provincial
Assembly is in session, if satisfied that circumstances exist which
render it necessary to take immediate action, make and promul-
gate an Ordinance as the circumstances may require.
Provisions
relating to
National
Assembly, etc.,
to apply to
Provincial
Assembly, etc.
Power of
Governor to
promulgate
Ordinances
.
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
See footnote 9 on page 5, supra.
2
The word “and” omitted by the Constitution (First Amdt.) Act, 1974 (33 of 1974),
s. 7 (w.e.f. the 4th May, 1974).
3
Subs. ibid., s. 7, for the full-stop.
4
Paragraph (g) added ibid.
5
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 40, for
“seventy”.
(2)    An Ordinance promulgated under this Article shall
have the same force and effect as an Act of the Provincial
Assembly and shall be subject to like restrictions as the power of
the Provincial Assembly to make laws, but every such Ordinance–
(a)    shall be laid before the Provincial Assembly and shall
stand repealed at the expiration of
1
[ninety days] from
its promulgation or, if before the expiration of that
period a resolution disapproving it is passed by the
Assembly, upon the passing of that resolution
2
[:]
3
[Provided that the Provincial Assembly may by a
resolution extend the Ordinance for a further period of
ninety days and it shall stand repealed at the expiration
of the extended period, or if before the expiration of
that period a resolution disapproving it is passed by
the Assembly, upon the passing of that resolution:
Provided further that extension for a further period
may be made only once.]
(b)    may be withdrawn at any time by the Governor.
(3)    Without prejudice to the provisions of clause (2), an
Ordinance laid before the Provincial Assembly shall be deemed
to be a Bill introduced in the Provincial Assembly.
C
HAPTER3.–THEPROVINCIALGOVERNMENTS
4
[129.  (1) Subject to the Constitution, the executive authority of
the Province shall be exercised in the name of the Governor by
the Provincial Government, consisting of the Chief Minister and
Provincial Ministers, which shall act through the Chief Minister.
(2)    In   the   performance   of   his   functions   under   the
Constitution, the Chief Minister may act either directly or
through the Provincial Ministers.]
5
[130. (1) There shall be a Cabinet of Ministers, with the Chief
Minister at its head, to aid and advise the Governor in the
exercise of his functions.
The Provincial
Government.
The Cabinet.
68                        CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 41, for “three
months”.
2
Subs. ibid., for “;and”.
3
Provisos ins.ibid.
4
Subs. ibid., s. 42, for “Article 129”.
5
Subs. ibid., s. 43, for “Article 130”.
(2)    The Provincial Assembly shall meet on the twenty-first
day following the day on which a general election to the Assembly
is held, unless sooner summoned by the Governor.
(3)    After the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker,
the Provincial Assembly shall, to the exclusion of any other
business, proceed to elect without debate one of its members to be
the Chief Minister.
(4)    The Chief Minsiter shall be elected by the votes of the
majority of the total membership of the Provincial Assembly:
Provided that, if no member secures such majority in the first
poll, a second poll shall be held between the members who secure
the two highest numbers of votes in the first poll and the member
who secures a majority of votes of the members present and voting
shall be declared to have been elected as Chief Minister:
Provided further that, if the number of votes secured by two
or more members securing the highest number of votes is equal,
further polls shall be held between them until one of them secures
a majority of votes of the members present and voting.
(5)    The member elected under clause (4) shall be called
upon by the Governor to assume the office of Chief Minister and
he shall, before entering upon the office, make before the Governor
oath in the form set out in the Third Schedule:
Provided that there shall be no restriction on the number of
terms for the office of the Chief Minister.
(6)    The Cabinet shall be collectively responsible to the
Provincial Assembly and the total strength of the Cabinet shall not
exceed
1
[seventeen] members or
2
[thirteen] percent of the total
membership of a Provincial Assembly, whichever is higher
3
[.]
4
*     *     *     *     *     *     *
(7)    The Chief Minister shall hold office during the pleasure
of the Governor, but the Governor shall not exercise his powers
under this clause unless he is satisfied that the Chief Minister does
not command the confidence of the majority of the members of the
Provincial Assembly, in which case he shall summon the
Provincial Assembly and require the Chief Minister to obtain a
vote of confidence from the Assembly.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN69
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-Seventh Amdt.) Act, 2025 (32 of 2025), s.14 for
“fifteen”.
2
Subs. ibid., for “eleven”.
3
Subs. ibid., for the colon.
4
Proviso omitted ibid.
(8)    The Chief Minister may, by writing under his hand
addressed to the Governor, resign his office.
(9)    A Minister who for any period of six consecutive
months is not a member of the Provincial Assembly shall, at the
expiration of that period, cease to be a Minister and shall not before
the dissolution of that Assembly be again appointed a Minister
unless he is elected a member of that Assembly.
(10)  Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as
disqualifying the Chief Minister or any other Minister for continu-
ing in office during any period during which the Provincial
Assembly stands dissolved, or as preventing the appointment of
any person as Chief Minister or other Minister during any such
period.
(11)  The Chief Minister shall not appoint more than
1
[seven]
Advisers.]
2
[131.  The Chief Minister shall keep the Governor informed on
matters relating to Provincial administration and on all legislative
proposals the Provincial Government intends to bring before the
Provincial Assembly.]
3
[132. (1) Subject to clauses
4
[(9) and (10)] of Article 130, the
Governor shall appoint Provincial Ministers from amongst
members of the Provincial Assembly on the advice of the Chief
Minister.
(2)    Before entering upon office, a Provincial Minister shall
make before the Governor oath in the form set out in the Third
Schedule.
(3)    A Provincial Minister may, by writing under his hand
addressed to the Governor, resign his office or may be removed
from office by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister.
Governor to be
kept informed.
Provincial
Ministers.
70                        CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-Seventh Amdt.) Act, 2025 (32 of 2025), s. 14, for
the word “five”.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 44, for
“Article 131”.
3
Subs. by P.O. No. 14 of 1985, Art. 2 and Sch., for “Articles 132 and 133”.
4
Subs. by the Act No. 10 of 2010, s. 45, for “(7) and (8)”.