[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/wp-content/uploads/2026/01/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT-ORDER1984-Amendment-up-to-date-2025.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

QSO Section 154: What matters may be proved in connection with proved statement relevant

under Article 46 or 47.— Whenever any statement, relevant under Article 46 or 47, is proved, all
matters may be proved either in order to contradict or corroborate it, or in order to impeach or confirm
the credit of the person by whom it was made, which might have been proved if that person had been
called as a witness and had denied upon cross-examination the truth of the matter suggested.
155. Refreshing memory. — (1)  A  witness  may,  while  under  examination,  fresh  his
memory by referring to any writing made by himself at the time of the transaction concerning which he
is questioned, or so soon afterwards that the Court considers it likely that the transaction was at that time
fresh in his memory
Page 63 of 59
(2) The witness may also refer to any such writing made by any other person, and read by the
witness within the time aforesaid, if when he read if he knew it to be correct.
(3) Whenever a witness may refresh his memory by reference to any document, he may, with
the permission of the Court, refer to a copy of such document:
Provided  the  Court  be  satisfied  that  there  is  sufficient  reason  for  the  non-production  of  the
original.
(4) An expert may refresh his memory by reference to professional treaties.
156. Testimony to facts stated in document mentioned in Article 155.— A witness
may also testify to facts mentioned in any such document as is mentioned in Article 155, although he
has no specific recollection of the facts themselves, if he is sure that the facts were correctly recorded in
the document.
Illustration
A book-keeper may testify to facts recorded by him in books regularly kept in the course of business, if
he knows that the books were correctly kept, although he has forgotten the particular transactions entered.
157. Right of adverse party  as to writing used to refresh memory. — Any writing
referred to under the provisions of the two last preceding Articles must be produced and shown to the
adverse party if he requires its, such party may, if he pleases, cross-examine the witness thereupon.
158. Production of documents. — (1) A witness summoned to produce a document shall,
if it is in his possession or power, bring it to Court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be
to its production or to its admissibility. The validity of any objection shall be decided on by the Court.
(2) The court, if it sees fit, may inspect the document, unless it refers to matters of State, or
take other evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility.
(3) If for such a purpose it is necessary to cause any document to be translated, the Court may,
if it thinks  fit,  direct  the  translator  to  keep  the  contents  secret, unless the document is  to  be  given  in
evidence; and, if the translator disobeys such direction, he shall be held to have committed an offence
under section 166 of the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860).
159. Giving, as evidence, of document called for and produced on notice. — When
a party calls for a document which he has given the other party notice to produce, and such document is
produced and inspected by the party calling for its production, he is bound to give it as evidence if the
party producing it requires him to do so.