[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CPC Section 11: Property attached before judgment not to be re-attached in

execution of decree.– Where property is under attachment by virtue of the
provisions of this Order and a decree is subsequently passed in favour of the
plaintiff, it shall not be necessary upon an application for execution of such
decree to apply for a re-attachment of the property.
12. Agricultural produce not attachable before judgment.– Nothing in
this Order shall be deemed to authorise the plaintiff to apply for the attachment of
any agricultural produce in the  possession of an agriculturist, or to empower the
Court to order the attachment or production of such produce.
1
[13. Small Cause Court not to attach immoveable property.– Nothing
in this Order shall be deemed to empower any Court of Small Causes to make
an order for the attachment of immovable property.]
ORDER XXXIX
TEMPORARY INJUNCTIONS AND INTERLOCUTORY ORDERS
Temporary Injunctions
1. Cases in which temporary injunction may be granted.– Where in
any suit it is proved by affidavit or otherwise-
(a) that any property in dispute in a suit is in danger of being
wasted, damaged or alienated by any party to the suit, or
wrongfully sold in execution of a decree, or
b) that the defendant threatens, or intends, to remove or dispose
of his property with a view to defraud his creditors.
the Court may by order grant a temporary injunction to restrain such act, or
make such other order for the purpose of staying and preventing the
wasting, damaging, alienation, sale, removal or disposition of the
property as the Court thinks fit, until the disposal of the suit or until further
orders.
2. Injunction to restrain repetition or continunace of breach.– (1) In any
suit for restraining the defendant from committing a breach of contract or other
injury of any kind, whether compensation is claimed in the suit or not, the plaintiff
may, at any time after the commencement of the suit, and either before or after
judgment, apply to the Court for a temporary injunction to restrain the defendant
from committing the breach of contract or injury complained of, or any breach of
contract or injury of a like kind arising out of the same contract or relating to the
same property or right.
(2) The Court may by order grant such injunction, on such terms as
to the duration of the injunction, keeping an account, giving security or otherwise,
as the Court thinks fit.
(3) In case of disobedience, or of breach of any such terms, the Court
granting an injunction may order the property of the person guilty of such
disobedience or breach to be attached, and may also order such person to be
detained in
2
[* *] prison for a term not exceeding six months, unless in the
meantime the Court directs his release.
(4) No attachment under this rule shall remain in force for more than one
year, at the end of which
1
Rule 13Inserted by the SmallCause Courts (Attachment of Immovable Property) Act, 1926(1of 1926), s.4.
2
The words “the civil” were omitted by the Civil Laws (Reforms) Act, 1994 ( XIV of 1994); assented to by the President on 27
July 1994; and, was published in the Gazette of Pakistan (Extraordinary), dated: 31 July 1994, pp. 683-688, s. 11.
time, if the disobedience or breach continues, the property attached may be
sold, and out of the proceeds the Court may award such compensation as it
thinks fit, and shall pay the balance, if any, to the party entitled thereto.
1
[(2A) An interim injunction passed under rules 1 or 2 in the absence of
defendant shall not ordinarily exceed fifteen days:
Provided that such injunction may be extended for failure of its service on the
defendant when such failure is not attributable to the plaintiff or when the
defendant seeks time for defence of application for injunction.
(2B) The order of injunction made under rules 1 or 2 after hearing the
parties or after notice to the defendant shall cease to have effect on the expiration
of six months unless extended by the Court after hearing the parties again and for
reasons to be recorded for such extension:
Provided that report of such extension shall be submitted to the High Court.]
2
[3. Before granting injunction Court to direct notice to opposite
party. The Court shall in all cases, before granting an injunction direct notice of
the application for the same to be given to the opposite-party:
3
[Provided that, except in the case of sale of goods for default in payment, at the
stipulated time, of a debt in respect of which the goods were pledged with any
bank, or where the injunction is to be granted against Government or a
Government servant as such or any statutory authority, board or corporation set
up or established by Government in any case not involving the ejectment of any
person from, or the demolition of, any premises, the Court may, where it appears
that the object of granting injunction would be defeted by the delay, dispense with
such notice:
Provided further that the period of notice under this rule to Government or a
Government servant as such or any statutory authority, board or corporation set
up or established by Government shall not be less than two days nor exceed
seven days.]
4. Order for injunction may be discharged, varied or set aside.–
Any order for an injunction may be discharged, or varied, or set aside by the
Court, on application made thereto by any party dissatisfied with such order.
4
[4A. Injunction to cease to be in force after certain period.– An injunction
granted by a Court in a suit which seeks to question the validity or legal effect of
any order made, proceedings taken or act done by any authority or person, which
has been made, taken or done, or purports to have been made, taken or done,
under any law which is specified in Part I of the First Schedule to the
Constitution or relates to, or is connected with, assessment or collection of public
revenues shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of
5
[six months]
1
Inserted by  the  Civil  Laws  (Reforms)  Act,  1994  (  XIV  of  1994);  assented  to  by  the  President  on  27  July  1994;  and,  was
published in the Gazette of Pakistan (Extraordinary), dated: 31 July 1994, pp. 683-688, s. 11.
2
Substituted by the civil Procedure and Limitation (Amendment) Ordinance, 1961(9of 1961), s.2, for the originalrule3.
3
Substituted by the LawReforms Ordinance, 1972(12of 1972), s.2and Sch. for the original provisos.
4
Rule 4A Inserted by the code of CivilProcedure (Amendment) Act, 1976(15of 1976), s.2.
5
Substituted by the code of CivilProcedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1977(25of 1977), s.2,for “sixty days”.
following the day on which it is made, unless the case is finally decided, or the
injunction is discharged or set aside, by the Court earlier.
Explanation.- In this rule, 'public revenues' includes the dues of any bank
owned by the Federal Government or of any corporation or undertaking owned or
controlled by the Federal Government or a Provincial Government.]
5. Injuction to corporation binding on its officers.– An injunction
directed to a corporation is binding not only on the corporation itself, but also
on all members and officers of the corporation whose personal action it seeks to
restrain.
Interlocutory Orders
6. Power to order interim sale.– The Court may, on the application of any
party to a suit, order the sale, by any person named in such order, and in such
manner and on such terms as it thinks fit, of any movable property, being the
subject-matter of such suit, or attached before judgment in such suit, which is
subject to speedy and natural decay, or which for any other just and sufficient
cause it may be desirable to have sold at once.
7. Detention, preservation, inspection, etc., of subject-matter of suit.– (1)
The Court may, on the application of any party to a suit, and on such terms
as it thinks fit,-
a) make an order for the detention, preservation or inspection
of any property which is the subject-matter of such suit, or as
to which any question may arise therein;
b) for all or any of the purposes aforesaid authorise any person
to enter upon or into any land or building in the possession of
any other arty to such suit; and
c) for all or any of the purposes aforesaid authorise any
samples to be taken, or any observation to be made or
experiment to be tried, which may seem necessary or
expedient for the purpose of obtaining full information or
evidence.
(2) The provisions as to execution of process shall apply, mutatis
mutandis, to persons authorised to enter under this rule.
8. Applictaion for such orders to be after notice.– (1) An application by
the plaintiff for an order under rule 6 or rule 7 may be made after notice to the
defendant at any time after institution of the suit.
(2) An application by the defendant for a like order may be made after
notice to the plaintiff at any time after appearance.