[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/CrPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CrPC Section 262: Procedure  6[prescribed  in  Chapter  XX]  applicable

6
[(1)  In  trials  under  this  Chapter,
the procedure prescribed in Chapter XX shall be followed, except as hereinafter mentioned].
(2) Limit of imprisonment. No sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding three months shall be
passed in the case of any conviction under this Chapter.
263. Record in cases where there is no appeal. In cases where no appeal lies, the Magistrate or Bench
of Magistrates need not record the evidence of the witnesses or frame a formal charge; but he or they shall enter
in such form as the
2
[Provincial Government] may direct the following particulars :
1
Provisio omitted by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s.2 and Sch.
2
Subs. by A.O., 1937, for “L.G”.
3
Ins. by ord. 12 of 1972, s. 2. and sch.
4
Subs. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 75, for “and 447”.
5
Ins. ibid., s. 75.
6
Subs. by Ordinance 12 of 1972, s.2 and Sch., for “for summons and warrant­cases”.
7
Subs. ibid., for sub-section (1) .
8
Subs. by ord. 85 of 02, s. 5.
Page 121 of 319
(a) the serial number;
(b) the date of the commission of the offence;
(c) the date of the report or complaint;
(d) the name of the complainant (if any);
(e) the name, parentage and residence of the accused ;
(f) the offence  complained  of and the offence (if any) proved, and in cases coming under clause (d),
clause  (e),  clause  (f)  or  clause (g) of  sub-section  (1)  of  section  260  the  value  of  the  property in
respect of which the offence has been committed ;
(g) the plea of the accused and his examination (if any);
(h) the finding, and, in the case of a conviction, a brief statement of the reasons therefor ;
(i) the sentence or other final order; and
(j) the date on which the proceedings terminated.
1
[264. Record in appealable cases. In every case tried summarily by a Magistrate or Bench in which
an appeal  lies,  such  Magistrate  or  Bench  shall  record  the  substance  of  the  evidence  and  also  the  particulars
mentioned in section 263 and shall, before passing any sentence record a judgment in the case.]
265.   Language   of  record and  Judgment. (1) Records made under section 263 and judgments
recorded under section 264 shall be written by the Presiding Officer, either in English or in the language  of  the
Court, or, if the Court to which such presiding officer is immediately subordinate so directs, in such officer's
mother-tongue.
(2) Bench  may  be  authorized  to  employ  clerk. The
2
[Provincial  Government]  may  authorize  any
Bench  of  Magistrates  empowered  to  try  offences summarily to  prepare  the  aforesaid  record  or judgment by
means of an officer appointed in this behalf by the Court to which such Bench is immediately subordinate,  and
the record or judgment so prepared shall be signed by each member of such Bench present taking part in the
proceedings.
(3) If no such authorization be given, the record prepared by a member of the Bench and signed as aforesaid
shall be the proper record.
(4) If the Bench differ in opinion, any dissentient member may write a separate judgment.
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s.2 and Sch. for “original section 264”.
2
subs. by A.O , 1973, for "L.G."
Page 122 of 319
1
[CHAPTER XXIIA
TRIALS BEFORE HIGH COURTS AND COURTS OF SESSION
265A. Trials before Court of Session to be conducted by Public Prosecutor. In every trial before
a Court of Session, initiated upon a police report, the prosecution shall be conducted by the Public Prosecutor.
265B. Procedure in cases triable by High Courts and Courts of Session. The following procedure
shall be observed by the High Courts and the Courts of Session in the  trial of cases triable  by the  said  Courts.
265C.  Supply  of statements and documents to  the accused. (1) In all cases instituted upon police
report, copies of the following documents shall be supplied free of cost to the accused not later than seven
days before the commencement of the trial, namely:
(a) the first information reports ;
(b) the police report ;
(c) the statements of all witnesses recorded under sections 161 and 164; and
(d) the inspection note recorded by an investigation officer on his first visit  to the place of
occurrence and the note recorded by him on recoveries made, if any:
Provided that, If arty part of a statement recorded under section 161 or section 164 is such that its disclosure
to the accused would be inexpedient in the public interest, such part of the statement shall be excluded from the
copy of the statement furnished to the accused.
(2) In all cases instituted upon a complaint in  writing,
(a) the complainant shall-
(i) state in the petition of complaint the substance of the accusation, the names of his witnesses and
the gist of the evidence which he is likely to adduce at the trial; and
(ii) within three days of the order of the Court under section 204 for issue of process to the accused,
file in the Court for supply to the accused as many copies of the  complaint  and  any other
document which he has filed with his complaint as the number of the accused;
(b) copies of the complaint and any other documents which the complainant has filed therewith and the
statement under section 200 or section 202 shall be supplied free of cost to the accused not later
than seven days before the commencement of the trial.
265D  When  charge  is  to  be  framed. If,  after  persuing  the  police  report or, as  the  case  may  be,  the
complaint, and all other documents and statements filed by the prosecution, the  Court  is  of opinion that  there
is ground for proceeding with the trial of the accused it shall frame in writing a charge against the accused.
1
Chapter XXII-A which was inserted by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972) has been subs. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1976 (44 of 1976), s.2.
The Code of Crimnal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1976 (44 of 1976), i.e Chapter XXII-A only shall apply to the Provincially Administerd Tribal Area of N.W.F.P. by N.W.F.P. notfn NO. 13/27-HD (TA-I)77,
dated 22-6-78, see, N.W.F.P., Gazette, Extraordinary, page 11.
Page 123 of 319
265E. Plea. (1) The charge shall be read and explained to the accused, and he shall be asked
whether he is guilty or has any defence to make.
(2) If the accused pleads guilty, the Court shall record the plea, and may in its discretion convict
him thereon.
265F.  Evidence for prosecution. (1) If the accused does not plead guilty or the Court in its
discretion does not convict him on his plea, the Court shall proceed to hear the complainant (if any)
and take all such evidence as may be produced in support of the prosecution:
Provided that the Court shall not be bound to hear any person as complainant in any case  in
which the complaint has been made by a Court.
(2) The  Court shall ascertain  from  the Public Prosecutor or, as  the  case  may  be,  from  the
complainant, the names of any persons likely to be acquainted with the facts of the case  and to be able
to give evidence for the prosecution, and shall summon such persons to give evidence before it.
(3) The Court may refuse to summon any such witness, if it is of opinion that such witness is being
called  for the  purpose  of vexation or  delay  or  defeating  the  ends  of justice.   Such  ground shall   be
recorded by the Court in writing.
(4) When the examination of the witnesses for the prosecution and the examination (if any) of  the
accused are concluded, the accused shall be asked whether he means to adduce evidence.
(5) If the accused puts in any written statement, the Court shall file it with the record.
(6) If the accused, or any one of several accused, says that he means to adduce evidence, the Court
shall call on the accused to enter on his defence and produce his evidence.
(7) If the accused, or any one of several accused, after entering on his defence, applies to the Court
to issue any process for compelling the attendance of any witness for examination or the production of
any document or other thing, the Court shall issue  such  process unless it  considers  that the application
is made for  the purpose of vexation or delay or defeating the ends of Justice.  Such ground shall be
recorded by the Court in writing.
265G.  Summing up by  prosecutor and defence. (1) In cases where the accused, or any one
of  several  accused,  does  not  adduce evidence in his defence,  the  Court shall, on  the close of  the
prosecution case and examination (if any) of the accused,  call upon the  prosecutor to sum up his  case
where after the accused shall make a reply.
Page 124 of 319
(2) In cases where the accused, or any of the several accused,  examines  evidence,  in his  defence
the Court shall, on the close of the defence case, call upon the accused to sum up the case whereafter
the prosecutor shall make a reply.
265H. Acquittal or conviction.-(1) If in any case under this Chapter in which a  charge  has  been
framed the Court finds the accused not guilty, it shall record an order of acquittal.
(2) If in  any case under this Chapter the Court finds the accused guilty  the Court shall,  subject    to
the provisions of section 265I, pass a sentence upon him according to law.
265I.  Procedure  in  case  of  previous  conviction.-(1) In a  case where, by  reason  of  a previous
conviction, the accused has been charged under section 221, sub-section (7), the Court, after finding
the accused guilty of the offence  charged and recording a  conviction,  shall record the  plea  of the
accused in relation to such part of the charge.
(2) If the accused admits that he has been previously convicted as alleged in  the  charge,  the  Court
may pass a sentence upon him according to law,  and  if  the  accused does not admit  that he has been
previously convicted as alleged in the charge,  the  Court may take  evidence  in  respect of the alleged
previous conviction, and shall record a finding thereon, and then pass sentence upon him according to
law.
265J. Statement under section 164 admissible. The statement of a witness duly  recorded  under
section 164, if it was made in the presence of the accused and if he had notice of it and was given an
opportunity  of  cross-examining  the  witness, may, in the  discretion  of  the  Court, if such  witness is
produced and examined, be treated as evidence in the case for all purposes subject to the provisions of
the Evidence Act, 1872 (II of 1872).
265K. Power of Court to acquit accused at any stage. Nothing in this  Chapter  shall  be deemed
to prevent a Court from acquitting an accused at any stage of the case, if, after hearing the prosecutor
and the accused and for reasons to be  recorded, it  considers that there  is  no probability of the accused
being convicted of any offence.
265L. Power of Advocate-General to stay prosecution. At any  stage  of any  trial before  a High
Court under this Code, before the sentence is passed, the Advocate-  General may,  if he thinks fit, inform
the  Court  on  behalf  of Government that  he will not  prosecute  the   accused   upon  the charge; and
thereupon all proceedings against the accused shall be stayed, and he  shall  be  discharged of and from
the  same.  But  such discharge  shall not  amount  to  an  acquittal  unless  the presiding judge otherwise
directs.
265M. Time of holding sittings. For the  exercise  of its  original  criminal jurisdiction,  every High
Court shall hold sittings on such days and at such convenient intervals as the Chief Justice  of  such Court
from time to time appoints.
Page 125 of 319
265N. Place of holding sittings.-(1) The High Court shall hold its sittings at the place at which it held
them immediately before the commencement  of the  Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972, or at  such other place  (if
any) as the Provincial Government may direct.
(2) But the High Court may, from time to time with the consent of the Provincial Government, hold
sittings at such other places within the local limits of its appellate jurisdiction as the High Court appoints.
(3) Such officer as the Chief Justice directs shall give prior notice in the official Gazette of all sittings
intended to be held for the exercise of the original criminal jurisdiction of the High Court.]
CHAPTER XXIII.
[OF TRIALS BEFORE HIGH COURTS AND COURTS OF SESSIONS.] Omitted by
the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (XIl of 1972), s. 2 and Sch.
CHAPTER XXIV
GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO INQUIRIES AND TRIALS