[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 153: Want only giving provocation  with intent to cause riot–if rioting be committed, if not

committed. Whoever malignantly, or wantonly, by doing anything which is illegal, gives provocation
to any person intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation will cause the offence of rioting
to be committed, shall, if the offence of rioting be committed in consequence of such provocation, be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine,
or with both; and if the offence of rioting be not committed, with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
1
[153A. Promoting enmity between different groups, etc. Whoever,
1
S.153A has successively been amended by the Indian Penal Code Amdt. Act, 1898 (4 of 1898), s. 5, A. O., 1961, Art. 2 and Sch. and subs by the
Criminal Law (Amdt.) Act, 1973 (6 of 1973), s. 2. (w.e.f. 28th July, 1973), to read as above.
(a) by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible representations or otherwise, promotes
or incites, or attempts to promote or incite, on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence,
language, caste  or community or any  other ground whatsoever disharmony  or feelings of enmity,
hatred or ill-will between different religious,  racial, language or regional  groups or  castes  or
communities; or
(b) commits, or incites any other person to commit, any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance of
harmony between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes, or communities
or any  group of  persons  identifiable  as  such  on any ground whatsoever and which disturbs  or  is
likely to disturb public tranquility; or
(c) organizes, or  incites any  other person  to organize, any exercise, movement, drill  or other similar
activity intending that the participants  in any such  activity  shall  use  or  be trained to  use criminal
force or violence or knowing it to be likely that the participants in any such activity will use or be
trained to use criminal force or violence, or participates, or incites any other person to participate,
in any such activity intending to use or be trained to use criminal force or violence or knowing it  to
be  likely that the participants  in any such  activity will use  or  be trained to  use criminal force  or
violence, against  any religious,  racial, language or regional  group or  caste  or community or any
group of persons identifiable as such on any ground whatsoever and any such activity for any reason
whatsoever causes or is likely to cause fear or alarm or a feeling of insecurity amongst members of
such religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine.
Explanation. It does not amount to an offence within the meaning of this section to point out, without
malicious intention and with an honest view to their removal, matters which are producing, or have a tendency to
produce, feelings of enmity or hatred between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or
communities].
1
[153B. Inducing students, etc., to take part in political activity. Whoever by words, either spoken
or written, or by signs, or by visible representations, or otherwise, induce or attempts to induce any student, or
any class of students, or any institution interested in or connected with students, to take  part in any political
activity
2
[which disturbs or undermines, or is likely to disturb or undermine, the public order] shall be punished
with imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine or with both.]
154. Owner or occupier of land on which an unlawful assembly is held. Whenever any unlawful
assembly or riot takes place the owner or occupier of the land upon which such unlawful assembly is held, or
such riot is committed, and any person having or claiming an interest in such land, shall be punishable with fine
not exceeding
3
[three thousand rupees], if he or his agent or manager, knowing that such offence is being or has
been committed, or having reason to believe it is likely to be committed, do not give the earliest notice thereof in
his or their power to the principal officer at the nearest police-station, and do not, in the case of his or their having
reason to believe that it was about to be committed, use all lawful means in his or their power to  prevent it and,
in the event of its taking place, do not use all lawful means in his or their power to disperse or suppress the riot
or unlawful assembly.
155. Liability of person for whose benefit riot is committed. Whenever a riot is committed for the
benefit or on behalf of any person who is the owner or  occupier of any land respecting which such riot takes
place or who claims any interest in such land, or in the subject of any dispute which gave rise to the riot, or
1
S. 153B was ins. by the Pakistan Penal Code (Second Amdt.) Ordinance, 1962 (70 of 1962), s. 2.
2
Ins. by the Pakistan Penal Code (Amdt.) Act, 1965, (20 of 1965), s. 2.
3
Subs. by Ord. 86 of 2002, s.2 and Sch. I, for “one Thousand rupees”.
who has accepted or derived any benefit therefrom, such person shall be punishable with fine, if he or his agent
or manager, having reason to believe that such riot was likely to be committed or that the unlawful assembly by
which such riot was committed was likely to be held, shall not respectively use all lawful means in his or their
power to prevent such assembly or riot from taking place, and for suppressing and dispersing the same.
156. Liability  of agent of owner  or  occupier for  whose  benefit  riot  is  committed. Whenever a
riot is committed for the benefit or on behalf of any person who is the owner or occupier of any land respecting
which such riot takes place, or who claims any interest in such land, or in the subject of any dispute which gave
rise  to the riot, or who has accepted or derived any benefit therefrom, the agent or manager of such person shall
be  punishable with fine, if  such agent or manager, having reason  to  believe that such  riot was likely  to  be
committed, or that the unlawful assembly by which such riot was committed was likely to be held, shall not use
all lawful means in his power  to  prevent  such  riot  or  assembly  from taking place and for  suppressing and
dispersing the same.
157. Harbouring  persons  hired  for  an  unlawful  assembly. Whoever harbours,  receives   or
assembles, in any house or premises in his occupation or charge, or under his control any persons, knowing that
such persons have been hired, engaged or employed, or are about to be hired, engaged or employed, to join or
become members of an unlawful assembly, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
158. Being  hired  to  take  part  in  an  unlawful  assembly  or  riot. Whoever is engaged or hired, or
offers or attempts to be hired or engaged, to do or assist in doing any of the acts specified in section 141, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or
with both,
Or to go armed. and whoever, being so engaged or hired as aforesaid, goes armed, or engages or offers to
go armed, with any deadly weapon or with anything which used as a weapon of offence is likely to cause death,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine,
or with both.
159. Affray. When two or more persons, by fighting in a public place, disturb the public peace, they are
said to “commit an affray”.
160. Punishment  for committing  affray. Whoever commits  an affray,  shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to
1
[three hundred rupees], or with both.
CHAPTER IX
OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS