[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CPC Section 4: Written Statements

B.
__
PROCESS.
C.
__
DISCOVERY, INSPECTION AND ADMISSION.
D.
__
DECREE.
E.
__
EXECUTION.
F.
__
SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS.
G.
__
APPEAL, REFERENCE AND REVIEW.
H.
__
MISCELLANEOUS.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
ORDER I
Parties to Suits
1. Who may be joined as plaintiffs.– All persons may be joined in one suit
as plaintiffs in whom any right to relief in respect of or arising out of the same
act or transaction or series of acts or transactions is alleged to exist, whether
jointly, severally or in the alternative, where, if such persons brought separate
suits, any common question of law or fact would arise.
2. Power of Court to order separate trials.– Where it appears to the Court
that any joinder of plaintiffs may embarrass or delay the trial of the suit, the Court
may put the plaintiffs to their election or order separate trials or make such other
order as may be expedient.
3. Who may be joined as defendants.– All persons may be joined as
defendants against whom any right to relief in respect of or arising out of the same
act or transaction or series of acts or transactions is alleged to exist, whether
jointly, severally or in the alternative, where if separate suits were brought against
such persons any common question of law or fact would arise.
4. Court  may  give  judgment  for  or  against  one  or  more  of  joint  parties.–
Judgment may be given without any amendment–
(a) for such one or more of the plaintiffs as may be found to be entitled
to relief, for such relief as he or they may be entitled to;
(b) against such one or more of the defendants as may be found to
be liable, according to their respective liabilities.
5. Defendant need not be interested in all the relief claimed.–  It shall
not be necessary that every defendant shall be interested as to all the relief
claimed in any suit against him.
6. Joinder of parties liable on same contract.– The plaintiff may, at his
option, join as parties to the same suit all or any of the persons severally, or
jointly and severally, liable on any one contract, including parties to bills of
exchange, hundis and promissory notes.
7. When plaintiff in doubt from whom redress is to be sought.–  Where
the plaintiff is in doubt as to the person from whom he is entitled to obtain redress,
he may join two or more defendants in order that the question as to which of the
defendants is liable, and to what extent, may be determined as between all
parties.
8. One  person  may  sue  or  defend  on  behalf  of  all  in  same  interest.– (1)
Where there are  numerous persons having the same interest in one suit, one
or more of such persons may, with the permission of the Court, sue or be sued,
or may defend, in such suit, on behalf of or for the benefit of all persons so
interested. But the Court shall in such case give, at the plaintiff's expense,
notice of the institution of the suit to all such persons either by personal service
or, where from the number of persons or any other cause such service is not
reasonably practicable, by public advertisement, as the Court in each case may
direct.
(2) Any person on whose behalf or for whose benefit a suit is instituted
or defended under sub-rule (1) may apply to the Court to be made a party to such
suit.
9. Misjoinder  and  non-joinder.– No suit shall be defeated by reason of
the misjoinder or non-joinder of parties, and the Court may in every suit deal
with the matter in controversy so far as regards the rights and interests of the
parties actually before it.
10. Suit in name of wrong plaintiff.– (1) Where a suit has been instituted in
the name of the wrong person as plaintiff or where it is doubtful whether it has
been instituted in the name of the right plaintiff, the Court may at any stage of the
suit, if satisfied that the suit has been instituted through a bona fide mistake, and
that it is necessary for the determination of the real matter in dispute so to do,
order any other person to be substituted or added as plaintiff upon such terms as
the Court thinks just.
(2) Court may strike out or add parties.– The Court may at any
stage of the proceedings, either upon or without the application of either party,
and on such terms as may appear to the Court to be just, order that the name
of any party improperly joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, be struck out,
and that the name of any person who ought to have been joined, whether as
plaintiff or defendant, or whose presence before the Court may be necessary in
order to enable the Court effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and
settle all the questions involved in the suit, be added.
(3) No person shall be added as a plaintiff suing without a next friend
or as the next friend of a plaintiff under any disability without his consent.
(4) Where defendant added, plaint to be amended.– Where a
defendant is added, the plaint shall, unless the Court otherwise directs, be
amended in such manner as may be necessary, and amended copies of the
summons and of the plaint shall be served on the new defendant and, if the
Court thinks fit, on the original defendant.
(5) Subject to the provisions of the
1
[Limitation Act, 1908  (IX  of
1908)], section 22, the proceedings as against any person added as
defendant shall be deemed to have begun only on the service of the summons.