[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 295: Injuring  or  defiling  place  of  worship,  with  intent  to  insult  the  religion  of  any  class

Whoever destroys, damages or defiles any place of worship, or any object held sacred by any class of
persons with the intention of thereby insulting the religion of any class of persons or with the knowledge
that any class of persons is likely to consider such destruction, damage or defilement as an insult to their
religion, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.
1
[295A. Deliberate and malicious acts intended to outrage religious feelings of any class by
insulting  its  religion  or  religious  beliefs. Whoever, with deliberate  and malicious intention  of
outraging the religious feelings of any class of
2
[the citizens of Pakistan], by words, either spoken or
written, or by visible representations insults or attempts to insult the religion or the religious beliefs of
that class, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
3
[ten years], or with fine, or with both.]
4
[295B. Defiling, etc., of copy of Holy Quran. Whoever willfully defiles, damages or desecrates
a copy of the Holy Quran or of an extract therefrom or uses it in any derogatory manner or for any
unlawful purpose shall be punishable with imprisonment for life.]
5
[295C. Use of derogatory remarks, etc., in respect of the Holy Prophet.
Whoever by
words,  either  spoken  or  written,  or  by  visible  representation,  or  by  any  imputation,  innuendo,  or
insinuation, directly or indirectly, defiles the sacred name of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (peace be
upon him) shall be punished with death, *or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.]
296. Disturbing  religious  assembly. Whoever  voluntarily  causes  disturbance  to  any assembly
lawfully engaged in the performance of religious worship, or religious ceremonies, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with
both.
297. Trespassing on burial places, etc. Whoever, with the intention of wounding the feelings of
any person, or of insulting the religion of any person, or with the knowledge that the feelings of any
person are likely to be wounded, or that the religion of any person is likely to be insulted thereby,
commits any trespass in any place of worship or on any place of sculpture, or any place set apart
for the performance of funeral rites or as a depository for the remains of the dead, or offers any indignity
to any human corpse, or causes disturbance to any persons assembled for the performance of funeral
ceremonies,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may one year, or with
fine, or with both.
1
S. 295A ins. by the Criminal Law Amdt. Act, 1927 (25 of 1927), s. 2.
2
Subs. by A.O., 1961, Art. 2 and Sch., for “His Majesty's subjects” (w.e.f. 23rd March 1956).
3
Subs.by Act, XVI of 1991, s. 2.
4
1ns. by the Pakistan Penal Code (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1982 (1 of 1982) s. 2.
5
Ins. by Act. III of 1986, s. 2.
*In S. 295-C, the words "or imprisonment for life" ceased to have effect w.e.f. 30-4-91, vide Shariat Petition No. 6/L of 1987, see PLD 1991, Vol.
XLIII, FSC-10.
298.  Uttering  words,  etc.  with  deliberate  intent  to  wound  religious  feelings. Whoever,  with
deliberate intention of wounding or outraging the religious feelings of any person or inciting religious, sectrain or
enthic hatred, utters any words by using loudspeaker or sound amplifier or any other device or makes any sound
in  the hearing of that person or makes any gesture in the sight of that person or persons, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description of a term which may extend to three years but shall not be less  than one year,
or with 0.5, million fine, or with both.]
298A. Use of derogatory remarks, etc., in respect of holy personages. Whoever by words, either
spoken  or written, or  by  visible  representation,  or  by any  imputation, innuendo or insinuation, directly  or
indirectly, defiles the sacred name of any wife (Ummul-Mumineen), or members of the family (Ahle-bait),  of  the
Holy  Prophet (peace  be  upon him), or any of the righteous Caliphs (Khulafa-e-Raashideen) or companions
(Sahaaba) of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him) shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.]
298B. Misuse of epithets, descriptions and titles, etc., reserved for certain holy personages or
places.–– (1) Any person of the Quadiani group or the Lahori group (who call themselves ‘Ahmadis’ or by any
other name) who by words, either spoken or written, or by visible representation,
(a) refers to, or addresses, any person, other than a Caliph or companion of the Holy Prophet Muhammad
(peace be upon him), as ‘Ameer­ul­Mumineen’, ‘Khalifa­tul­Mumineen’, ‘Khalifa­ tul­Muslimeen’,
‘Sahaabi’ or ‘Razi Allah Anho’ :
(b) refers to, or addresses, any person, other than a wife of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon
him) as ‘Ummul­Mumineen’ :
(c) refers to, or addresses, any person, other than a member of the family (Ahle-bait) of the Holy Prophet
Muhammad (peace be upon him), as Ahle-bait; or
(d) refers to, or names, or calls, his place of worship as ‘Masjid’ :
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Any person of the Quadiani group or Lahori group (who call themselves ‘Ahmadis’ or by any other name)
who by words, either spoken or written, or by visible representation, refers to the mode or form of call to prayers
followed by his faith as ‘Azan’ , or recites Azan as used by the Muslims, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
298C. Person of Quadiani group, etc., calling himself a Muslim or preaching or propagating
his faith. Any person of the Quadiani group or the Lahori group (who call themselves ‘Ahmadis’ or  by any
other name). who, directly or indirectly, poses himself as a Muslim, or calls, or refers to, his faith as Islam, or
preaches or propagates his faith, or invites others to accept his faith, by words, either spoken or written, or by
visible  representations,  or  in any manner whatsoever  outrages the religious feelings of  Muslims,  shall  be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be
liable to fine.]
CHAPTER XVI
OFFENCE AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY
Of Offence of Affecting Life
1
[299. Definitions
In this Chapter, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,
(a) “adult” means a person who has attained the age of eighteen years;
(b) “arsh” means the compensation specified in this Chapter to be paid to the victim or his heirs under
this chapter;
(c) “authorised medical officer” means a medical officer or a Medical Board, howsoever designated,
authorised by the Provincial Government;
(d) “daman” means the compensation determined by the court to be paid by the offender to the victim
for causing hurt not liable to arsh ;
(e) “diyat” means the compensation specified in section 323 payable to the heirs of the victim;
2
["(ee) "fasad-fil-arz" includes the past  conduct  of the offender or whether he has  any previous
conviction  or the brutal  or shocking manner in which  the offence  has been committed which is
outrageous  to the public  conscience  or  if the offender is  considered  a  potential danger to the
community or if the offence has been committed in the name or on the pretext of honour;"
(f) “Government” means the Provincial Government;
(g) “ikrah­e­tam” means putting  any person, his spouse  or any of his blood  relations within  the
prohibited degree of marriage in fear of instant death or instant permanent impairing of any organ
of the body or instant fear of being subjected to sodomy or zina­bil­jabr;
(h) “ikrah­e­naqis” means any form of duress which does not amount to ikrah­i­tam;
(i) “minor” means a person who is not an adult;
3
[(ii) “offence committed in the name or on the pretext of honour” means an offence committed in the
name or on the pretext of karo kari, siyah kari or similar other customs or practices;]
(j) “qatl” means causing death of a person;
(k) “qisas” means punishment by causing similar hurt at the same part of the body of the convict as he
has caused to the victim or by causing his death if he has committed qatl-iamd, in exercise of the
right of the victim or a wali ;
(l) “ta’zir” means punishment other than qisas, diyat, arsh or daman ; and
(m) “wali” means a person entitled to claim qisas.
300. Qatl-e-amd. Whoever, with the intention of causing death or with the intention of causing bodily
injury to a person, by doing an act which in the ordinary course of nature is likely to cause death, or with the
knowledge that his act is so imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause death, causes the  death of
such person, is said to commit qatl-e-amd.
1
Subs. By Act II & 1997, s.7
2
Ins. by Act (XLIII of 2016), s. 2
3
Ins. Subs & added by Act 1 of 2005, Ss. 2&3.
301. Causing  death  of  person  other  than  the  person  whose  death  was  intended. Where  a
person, by doing anything which he intends or knows to be likely to cause death, causes death of any
person whose death he neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause such an act committed
by the offender shall be liable for qatl-e-amd.