[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://khalidzafar.com/wp-content/files_mf/1527158791QanuneShahadatOrder1984.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-14

QSO Section 43: Consideration of proved confession affecting person making it and others jointly under trial

for same offence. When more persons than one are being tried jointly for the same offence,
and a confession made by one of such persons is proved, —
(a) such confession shall be proof against the person; making it; and
(b) the Court may take into consideration such confession as circumstantial evidence against
such other person.
Explanation.— ―Offence‖, as used in this Article, includes the abetment of, or attempt to
commit, the offence.
Illustrations
(a) A and B are jointly tried for the murder of C. It is proved that A said: ―B and I murdered C‖.
The Court may consider the effect of this confession as against B.
(b) A is on his trial for the murder of C. There is evidence to show that C was murdered by A
and B, and that B said: ―A and I murdered C‖.
This statement may not be taken into consideration by the Court against A, as B is not being
jointly tried.
44. Accused persons to be liable to cross-examination. All accused persons, including an
accomplice, shall be liable to cross-examination.
45. Admission not conclusive proof but may estop. Admissions are not conclusive proof of the
matters admitted but they may operate as estoppels under the provisions hereinafter contained.
COMMENTARY
Admissions made in pleadings and evidentiary admissions. Connotation. Effect. Admission
embodied in Art. 113, Qanun-e-Shahadat is a rule of procedure while Art. 45 thereof, is to be
given effect through the rule of evidence. Admissions in pleadings were conclusive but not the
others. Admissions in pleadings would have overriding role which does not permit that
admissions through evidence or unrebutted statements be made basis of adjudication in
exclusion to admissions in pleadings. Defendants having admitted ownership of plaintiff‘s
predecessor in their written statement and thereafter, claiming themselves to be the owners
thereof, onus to prove such ownership should have been on defendants. Plaintiff‘s job to prove
ownership ends successfully when admission of their ownership had been made in written
statement by defendants. Defendant‘s oral statement that they had become owners of property
in question, through decree of Court, without producing on record such decree or copy of
judgment was of no effect and their ownership of property in question, was not established.
Oral evidence could not be of any value in absence of production of available documentary
evidence.9
STATEMENT BY PERSONS WHO CANNOT BE
CALLED AS WITNESSES
46. Cases in which statement of relevant fact by person who is dead or cannot be found, etc., is
relevant. Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who is dead, or who
cannot be found, or who has become incapable of giving evidence or whose attendance cannot
be procured without an amount of delay or expense which under the circumstances of the case
appears to the Court unreasonable, are themselves relevant facts in the following cases:—
(1) When it relates to cause of death. When the statement is made by a person as to cause of
his death, or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death, in
cases in which the causes of that person‘s death comes into question. Such statements are
relevant whether the person who made them was or was not, at the time when they were
made, under expectation of death, and whatever may be the nature of the proceeding in which
the cause of his death comes into question.
(2) Or is made in course of business. When the statement was made by such person in the
ordinary course of business, and in particular when it consists of any entry or memorandum
made by him in books kept in the ordinary course of business, or in the discharge of
professional duty; or of an acknowledgement written or signed by him of the receipt of money,
goods, securities or property of any kind; or of a document used in commerce written or signed
by him; or of the date of a letter or other document usually dated, written or signed by him.
(3) Or against interest of make. When the statement is against the pecuniary or proprietary
interest of the person making it, or when, if true, it would expose or would have exposed him
to a criminal prosecution or to a suit for damages.
(4) Or gives opinion as to public right or customs, or matters of general interest. When the
statement gives the opinion of any such person, as to the existence of any public right or
custom or matter of public or general interest, of the existence of which if it existed, he would
have been likely to be aware, and when such statement was made before any controversy as to
such right, custom or matter has arisen.
(5) Or relates to existence of relationship. When the statement relates to the existence of any
relationship by blood, marriage or adoption between persons as to when relationship by blood
marriage or adoption the person making the statement had special means of knowledge, and
when the statement was made before question in dispute was raised.
(6) Or is made in will or deed relating to family affairs. When the statement relates to the
existence of any relationship by blood, marriage or adoption between persons deceased, and is
made in any will or deed relating to the affairs of the family to which any such deceased person
belonged, or in any family pedigree, or upon any tombstone, family portrait or other thing on
which such statements are usually made and when such statement was made before the
question in dispute was raised.
(7) Or in document relating to transaction mentioned in Article 26, paragraph (a). When the
statement is contained in any deed, will or other document which relates to any such
transaction as is mentioned in Article 26, paragraph (a).
(8) Or is made by several persons and expresses feelings relevant to matter in question. When
the statement was made by a number of persons, and expressed feelings or impressions on
their part relevant to the matter in question.
Illustrations
(a) The question, is whether A was murdered by B; or A dies of injuries received in a
transaction in the course of which she was ravished. The question is, whether she was ravished
by B; or
The question is, whether A was killed by B under such circumstances that a suit would lie
against B by A‘s widow.
Statements made by A as to the cause of his or her death, referring respectively to the murder,
the rape and the actionable under consideration are relevant facts.
(b) The question is as to the date of A‘s birth
An entry in the diary of a deceased surgeon regularly kept in the course of business, stating
that, on a given day, he attended A‘s mother and delivered her of a son, is a relevant fact.
(c) The question is, whether A was in Peshawar on a given day.
A statement in the diary of a deceased solicitor, regularly kept in the course of business that on
a given day the solicitor attended A at a place mentioned, in Peshawar, for the purpose of
conferring with him upon specified business, is a relevant fact.
(d) The question is, whether a ship sailed from Karachi harbour on a given day.
A letter written by a deceased member of a merchants firm by which she was chartered to their
correspondents in London, to whom the cargo was consigned, stating that the ship sailed on a
given day from Karachi harbour is a relevant fact.
(e) The question is, whether rent was paid to A for certain land.
A letter from A‘s deceased agent to A saying that he had received the rent on A‘s account and
held it at A‘s order, is a relevant fact.
(f) The question is, whether A and b were legally married.
The statement of a deceased clergyman that he married them under such circumstances, that
the celebration would be a rime is relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A, a person who cannot be found, wrote a letter on a certain day.
The fact that a letter written by him is dated on that day is relevant.
(h) The question is, what was the cause of the wreck of a ship.
A protest made by the Captain, whose attendance cannot be procured, is a relevant fact.
(i) The question is, what was the cause of the wreck of a ship.
The statement made by the Captain, whose attendance cannot be procured, is a relevant fact.
(j) The question is, what was the price of grain on a certain day in a particular market. A
statement of the price, made by a deceased banya in the ordinary course of his business, is a
relevant fact.
(k) The question is, whether A, who is dead, was the father of B.
A statement by A that B was his son is a relevant fact.
(l) The question is, what was the date of the birth of A.
A letter from A‘s deceased father to a friend, announcing the birth of A on a given day, is a
relevant fact.
(m) The question is, whether and when, A and B were married.
An entry in a memorandum-book by C, the deceased father of B, of his daughter‘s marriage
with A on a given date, is a relevant fact.
(n) A sues B for a libel expressed in a pointed caricature exposed in a shop window. The
question is as to the similarity of the caricature and its libelous character. The remarks on a
crowd of spectators on these points may be proved.
COMMENTARY
Dying declaration. Nothing was available on record that official had not recorded the dying
declaration in verbatim, though in the translated form. Nothing could be brought out in the
cross-examination of recording Magistrate which could cast doubt as to the veracity of the
contents of the dying declaration which was made in Urdu and translated into Sindhi and
English. Contention that dying declaration was liable to be discarded as it was not recorded in
the language namely Urdu, in which it was made, particularly in the absence of any material
that the Recording Magistrate was well conversant with Urdu, Sindhi and English languages,
was repelled. Dying declaration, if did not suffer from any infirmity, was sufficient to warrant
conviction for an offence.1
Dying declaration. Presence of relatives around the deceased. Effect. Dying declaration made in
presence of relatives be always taken with a pinch of salt and the same renders the dying
declaration doubtful. Prompting of relatives to the deceased at the time of recording of dying
declaration. Effect. No sanctity can be attached to a dying declaration where the relatives are
present around and where the names of the accused are prompted by such relatives.2
Admissibility of depositions and former testimony. Depositions taken by Magistrate who was
incompetent to do so, cannot be transferred under provisions of Art. 47. Requirements of Art.
47 must be proved in letter and spirit before depositions of witnesses are transferred to file of
Sessions Court. It was held that in circumstances of case, depositions of witnesses brought on
record of Sessions Court could not be treated as evidence.3
Dying declaration. No mandatory pre-requisites of law exist that a dying declaration cannot be
made before a police officer or that it should always be in writing. Dying declaration can be oral
and communicated by means of gestures when the victim cannot speak due to his critical
condition.4
Dying declaration. Admissibility. Admissibility of dying declaration not affected by S. 164, Cr.P.C.
Provisions of S. 164, Cr.P.C. do not in any way affect the admissibility of a statement made by a
person if it falls within the terms of Art. 46 of Qanun-e-Shahadat, 1984.5
Oral dying declaration. Admissibility. Dying declaration is admissible even if orally made.6
Dying declaration. Sufficiency to sustain conviction thereon. Conditions. Dying declaration, by
itself, was sufficient to sustain conviction thereon provided there was no chance of mistaken
identity; deceased was capable of making statement; the time elapsed after sustaining injury
before deceased made statement; whether statement rang true; statement was free from
promptness of others and deceased was not a man of questionable charcter.6a
Appreciation of evidence. Dying declaration. Great caution is to be taken before placing reliance
on a dying declaration because it is a weak piece of evidence as its maker is not subjected to
cross-examination.7