[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 388: Extortion   by   threat   of   accusation   of   an   offence   punishable   with   death   or

1
[imprisonment  for  life]. etc. Whoever commits extortion  by  putting  any  person in fear  of  an
accusation against that person or any other, of having committed or attempted to commit any offence
punishable with death,  or with
1
[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment for  a  term  which  may
extend to ten years, or of having attempted to induce any other person to commit such offence, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine; and, if the  offence  be  one  punishable  under  section  377  of  this  Code,  may  be
punished with
1
[imprisonment for life].
l
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation”.
2
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
389. Putting person in fear of accusation of offence, in order to commit extortion. Whoever,
in order  to  the committing of  extortion,  puts  or  attempts  to  put  any  person in fear  of  an  accusation,
against that person or any other, of having committed, or attempted to commit an offence punishable
with death or with
l
[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten
years, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the offence be punishable under section 377 of this  Code,
may be punished with
l
[imprisonment for life.]
Of Robbery and Dacoity
390. Robbery. In all robbery there is either theft or extortion.
When  theft  is  robbery. Theft is “robbery” if, in order  to  the committing of  the  theft,  or in
committing the theft, or in carrying away or attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft,
the  offender,  for  that  end,  voluntarily  causes  or  attempts  to  cause  to  any  person  death  or  hurt  or
wrongful restraint, or fear of instant death or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.
When extortion is robbery. Extortion is “robbery” if the offender, at the time of committing the
extortion, is in the presence of the person put in fear, and commits the extortion by putting that  person
in fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint to that person, or to some other
person, and, by so putting in fear, induces the person so put in fear then and there to deliver up the thing
extorted.
Explanation. The offender is said to be present if he is sufficiently near to put the other person
in fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.
Illustrations
a. A holds Z down, and fraudulently takes Z’s money and jewels from Z’s clothes, without Z’s
consent.  Here  A  has  committed  theft,  and, in order  to  the committing of  that  theft,  has
voluntarily caused wrongful restraint to Z. A has therefore committed robbery.
b. A  meets  Z  on  the  high-road,  shows  a pistol, and  demands Z’s purse. Z, in consequence,
surrenders his purse. Here A has extorted the purse from Z by putting him in fear of instant
hurt,  and  being  at  the time of committing the  extortion in his presence.  A  has  therefore
committed robbery.
c. A meets Z and Z’s child on the high-road. A takes the child, and threatens to fling it down a
precipice,  unless  Z  deliver his purse. Z, in consequence,  delivers his purse.  Here  A  has
extorted the purse from Z, by causing Z to  be in fear  of instant hurt to the child who is
there present. A has therefore committed robbery on Z.
d. A obtains property from Z by saying “Your child is in the hands of my gang, and will be
put to death unless you send us ten thousand rupees.” This is extortion, and punishable as
such: but it is not robbery, unless Z is put in fear of the instant death of his child.
391. Dacoity. When five or more persons conjointly commit or attempt to commit a robbery, or
where the whole number of persons conjointly committing or attempting to commit a robbery,
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
and persons present and aiding such commission or attempt, amount to give or more every person so
committing, attempting or aiding, is said to commit “dacoity”.
392. Punishment  for  robbery. Whoever commits robbery  shall  be  punished with  rigorous
imprisonment for a term which
1
[shall not be less than three years nor more than] ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine ; and, if the robbery be committed on the highway
2
* * * the imprisonment may be
extended to fourteen years.
393. Attempt to commit robbery. Whoever attempts to commit robbery shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
394. Voluntarily  causing  hurt  in  committing  robbery. If  any  person, in committing or in
attempting  to commit robbery,  voluntarily  causes  hurt,  such  person,  and  any  other  person jointly
concerned in committing or attempting to commit such robbery, shall be punished with
2
[imprisonment
for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
1
[shall not be less than four years nor more
than] ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
395. Punishment for dacoity. Whoever commits dacoity shall be punished with
2
[imprisonment
for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
1
[shall not be less than four years nor more
than] ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
396. Dacoity  with  murder. If  anyone  of  five  or  more  persons,  who  are  conjointly committing
dacoity, commits murder in so committing dacoity, everyone of  those person shall be punished with
death, or
2
[imprisonment for life], or rigorous imprisonment for a term which
1
[shall not be less than
four years nor more than] ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
397. Robbery  or  dacoity  with  attempt  to  cause  death  or  grievous  hurt. If,  at  the time of
committing robbery or dacoity, the offender uses any deadly weapon, or causes grievous hurt to any
person, or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, the imprisonment with which such
offender shall be punished shall not be less than seven years.
398. Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly weapon. If, at the time
of  attempting  to commit robbery  or  dacoity,  the  offender is armed with any  deadly  weapon,  the
imprisonment with which such offender shall be punished shall not be less than seven years.
399. Making  preparation  to  commit  dacoity. Whoever  makes  any  preparation  for committing
dacoity, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
400. Punishment for belonging to gang of dacoits. Whoever, at any time after the passing of this
Act, shall belong to a gang of persons associated for the purpose of habitually committing dacoity, shall
be punished with
2
[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
1
Subs. by the Criminal Laws (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1980 (3 of 1980), ss.7­10, for “may
extend to”.
2
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for
“transportation for life”.
3
Omitted by Act VIII of 1993, s.2.
401. Punishment for belonging to gang of thieves. Whoever, at any time after the passing of this
Act, shall belong to any wandering or other gang of persons associated for the purpose of habitually
committing theft or robbery, and not being a gang of thugs or dacoits, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
402. Assembling for purpose of committing dacoity. Whoever, at any time after the passing of
this Act, shall be one of five or more persons assembled for the purpose of committing dacoity, shall
be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also  be
liable to fine.
1
OF HIJACKING
402A.  Hijacking. Whoever  unlawfully,  by  the  use  or  show  of  force  or  by  threats  of  any  kind,
seizes, or exercises control of, an aircraft is said to commit hijacking.
402B. Punishment for hijacking. Whoever commits, or conspire or attempts to commit, or abets
the commission of, hijacking shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to forfeiture of property and fine.
402C. Punishment for harbouring hijacker, etc. Whoever knowingly harbours any person whom
he knows or has reason to believe to be a person who is about to commit or has committed or abetted
an  offence  of hijacking, or knowingly permits  any  such  persons  to  meet  or assemble in any  place  or
premises in his possession or under his control, shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life,
and shall also be liable to fine.]
2
[402D.Provincial Government not to interfere in sentences of rape.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 401, 402 or 402B, the Provincial Government shall not
suspend, remit or commute any sentence passed under section 376 of the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV
of 1860).].
Of Criminal Misappropriation of Property
403. Dishonest misappropriation of property. Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts
to his own use any moveable property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to two years, or with fine or with both.
Illustrations
a. A takes property belonging to Z out of Z’s possession in good faith, believing, at the time
when he takes it, that the property belongs to himself. A is not guilty of theft; but if A, after
discovering his mistake, dishonestly appropriates the property to his own use, he is guilty
of an offence under this section.
1
Ins. by the Pakistan Penal Code (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1981 (30 of 1981), s. 2.
2
Ins by Act 26 of 2011, s.4.
b. A,  being  on  friendly  terms with Z, goes  into Z’s library in Z’s absence  and  takes  away  a
book without Z’s express consent. Here, if A was under the impression, that he had Z’s
implied consent to take the book for the purpose of reading it, A has not committed theft.
But if A afterwards sells the book for his own benefit, he is guilty of an offence under this
section.
c. A and B, being joint owners of a horse, A takes the horse out of B’s possession, intending
to use it. Here, as A has a right to use the horse, he does not dishonestly misappropriate it.
But, if A sells the horse and appropriates the whole proceeds to his own use, he is guilty
of an offence under this section.
Explanation 1. A dishonest misappropriation for a time only is a misappropriation within the
meaning of this section.
Illustration
A finds a Government promissory note belonging to Z, bearing a blank endorsement. A, knowing
that the note belongs to Z, pledges it with a banker as a security for a loan, intending at a future time to
restore it to Z. A has committed an offence under this section.
Explanation 2. A person who finds property not in the possession of any other person, and
takes such property for the purpose of protecting it for, or of restoring it to, the owner, does not take or
misappropriate it dishonestly, and is not guilty of an offence ; but he is  guilty of  the  offence  above
defined, if he appropriates it to his own use, when he knows or has the means of discovering the owner,
or  before  he  has  used  reasonable  means  to  discover  and give notice  to  the  owner  and  has  kept  the
property a reasonable time to enable the owner to claim it.
What are reasonable means or what is a reasonable time in such a case, is a question of fact.
It is not  necessary  that  the  finder should know  who is the  owner  of  the  property,  or  that  any
particular person is the owner of it, it is sufficient if, at the time of appropriating it, he does not believe
it to be his own property, or in good faith believes that the real owner cannot be found.
Illustrations
(a) A finds a rupee on the high-road, not knowing to whom the rupee belongs. A picks up the
rupee. Here A has not committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A finds a letter on the road, containing a bank note. From the direction and contents of the
letter  he  learns  to  whom  the  note belongs. He  appropriates  the  note.  He is  guilty of  an
offence under this section.
(c) A finds a cheque payable to bearer. He can form no conjecture as to the person who has
lost the cheque. But the name of the person, who has drawn the cheque, appears. A  knows
that  this  person  can  direct him to  the  person  on  whose  favour  the  cheque  was  drawn.  A
appropriates the cheque without attempting to discover the owner. He is guilty of an offence
under this section.
(d) A sees Z drop his purse with money in it. A picks up the purse with the intention of restoring
it to Z, but afterwards appropriates it to his own use. A has committed an offence under this
section.
(e) A finds a purse with money, not knowing to whom it belongs; he afterwards discovers that
it belongs to Z, and appropriates it to his own use. A is guilty of an offence under this section.
(f) A  finds  a  valuable ring, not  knowing  to  whom it belongs. A sells  it immediately without
attempting to discover the owner. A is guilty of an offence under this section.