[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 81: Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and to prevent other harm

Nothing is an offence merely by reason of its being done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause
harm, if it be done without any criminal intention to cause harm, and in good faith for the purpose of
preventing or avoiding other harm to person or property.
Explanation. It is a question of fact in such a case whether the harm to be prevented or avoided
was of such a nature and so imminent as to justify or excuse the risk of doing the act with the knowledge
that it was likely to cause harm.
Illustrations
(a) A, the captain of a steam vessel, suddenly and without any fault or negligence on his part,
finds himself in such a position that, before he can stop his vessel, he must inevitably run
down a boat B, with twenty or thirty passengers on board, unless he changes the course of
his vessel, and that, by changing his course, he must incur risk of running down a boat C
with only two passengers on board, which he may possibly clear. Here, if A alters his course
without any intention to run down the boat C and in good faith for the purpose of avoiding
the danger to the passengers in the boat B, he is not guilty of an offence, though he may run
down the boat C by doing an act which he knew was likely to cause that effect, if it be found
as a matter of fact that the danger which he intended to avoid was such as to excuse him in
incurring the risk of running down C.
(b) A, in a great fire, pulls down houses in order to prevent the conflagration from spreading.
He does this with the intention in good faith of saving human life or property. Here, if it be
found that the harm to be prevented was of such a nature and so imminent as to excuse A’s
act, A is not guilty of the offence.
39
82. Act of child under seven years of age. Nothing is an offence which is done by a child under
1
[ten] years of age.
83. Act of a child above seven and under twelve of immature understanding. Nothing is an
offence which is done by a child above
1
[ten] years of age and under
1
[fourteen], who has not attained
sufficient  maturity  of  understanding  to judge of  the  nature  and  consequences  of his conduct  on  that
occasion.
84. Act of a person of unsound mind. Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at
the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act,
or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.