[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://na.gov.pk/uploads/documents/6926e060076ed_467.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

Constitution Section 23: Every citizen shall have the right to acquire, hold and

dispose of property in any part of Pakistan, subject to the
Constitution and any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in
the public interest.
24.  (1)  No person shall be deprived of his property save in
accordance with law.
(2)    No property shall be compulsorily acquired or taken
possession of save for a public purpose, and save by the authority
of law which provides for compensation therefor and either fixes
the amount of compensation or specifies the principles on and the
manner in which compensation is to be determined and given.
(3)    Nothing in this Article shall affect the validity of–
(a)    any law permitting the compulsory acquisition or
taking possession of any property for preventing
danger to life, property or public health; or
(b)    any law permitting the taking over of any property
which has been acquired by, or come into the
possession of, any person by any unfair means, or in
any manner, contrary to law; or
(c)    any law relating to the acquisition, administration or
disposal of any property which is or is deemed to be
enemy property or evacuee property under any law
(not being property which has ceased to be evacuee
property under any law); or
Provision as
to property.
Protection of
property
rights.
14                         CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
(d)    any law providing for the taking over of the
management of any property by the State for a limited
period, either in the public interest or in order to
secure the proper management of the property, or for
the benefit of its owner; or
(e)    any law providing for the acquisition of any class of
property for the purpose of–
(i)    providing education and medical aid to all or any
specified class of citizens; or
(ii)    providing housing and public facilities and
services   such   as   roads,   water   supply,
sewerage, gas and electric power to all or any
specified class of citizens; or
(iii)    providing maintenance to those who, on account
of unemployment, sickness, infirmity or old age,
are unable to maintain themselves; or
(f)    any existing law or any law made in pursuance of
Article 253.
(4)    The adequacy or otherwise of any compensation
provided for by any such law as is referred to in this Article, or
determined in pursuance thereof, shall not be called in question
in any court.
25.   (1)    All citizens are equal before law and are entitled to
equal protection of law.
(2)    There shall be no discrimination on the basis of sex
1
*.
(3)    Nothing in this Article shall prevent the State from
making any special provision for the protection of women and
children.
2
[25A.       The State shall provide free and compulsory education
to all children of the age of five to sixteen years in such manner
as may be determined by law.]
Equality of
citizens.
Right to
education.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN                       15
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
The word “alone” omitted by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of
2010), s. 8.
2
New Article 25A ins. ibid., s. 9.
26.   (1)    In respect of access to places of public entertainment
or resort, not intended for religious purposes only, there shall be
no discrimination against any citizen on the ground only of race,
religion, caste, sex, residence or place of birth.
(2)    Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the State from
making any special provision for women and children.
27.   (1)    No citizen otherwise qualified for appointment in the
service of Pakistan shall be discriminated against in respect of
any such appointment on the ground only of race, religion, caste,
sex, residence or place of birth:
Provided that, for a period not exceeding
1
[forty] years from
the commencing day, posts may be reserved for persons
belonging to any class or area to secure their adequate
representation in the service of Pakistan:
Provided further that, in the interest of the said service,
specified posts or services may be reserved for members of either
sex if such posts or services entail the performance of duties and
functions which cannot be adequately performed by members of
the other sex
2
[:]
3
[Provided also that under-representation of any class or
area in the service of Pakistan may be redressed in such manner
as   may   be   determined   by   an   Act   of   Majlis-e-Shoora
(Parliament).]
(2)    Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent any Provincial
Government, or any local or other authority in a Province, from
prescribing, in relation to any post or class of service under that
Government or authority, conditions as to residence in the
Province, for a period not exceeding three years, prior to
appointment under that Government or authority.