[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/wp-content/uploads/2026/01/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT-ORDER1984-Amendment-up-to-date-2025.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

QSO Section 78: Proof of signature and handwriting of person alleged to have signed or written

document produced. — If a document is alleged to be signed or to have been written wholly or in
part by any person, the signature or the handwriting of so much of the document as is alleged to be in
that person’s handwriting must be proved to be in his handwriting.
1
[78-A.  Proof  of  electronic  signature  and  electronic document. — If  an  electronic
document is alleged to be signed or to have been generated wholly or in part by any person through the
use of an information system, and where such allegation is denied, the application of a security procedure
to the signature or the electronic document must be proved.]
79. Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested. — If a document
is required by law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until two attesting witnesses of least
have been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there be two attesting witnesses alive, and
subject to the process of the Court and capable of given evidence:
Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an attesting witness in proof of the execution of
any  document,  not  being  a  will,  which  has  been  registered  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the
Registration Act, 1908 (XVI of 1908), unless its execution by the person by whom it purports to have
been executed is specifically denied.
80. Proof where no attesting witness found. — If no such attesting witness can be found,
it must be  proved that the witnesses  have either died, or cannot be found and that the  document was
executed by the person who purports to have done so.
81. Admission of execution by party to attested document. — The admission of a party
to an attested document of its execution by himself shall be sufficient proof of its execution as against
him, though it be a document required by law to be attested.
82. Proof when attesting witness denies the execution. — If the attesting witness denies
Page 41 of 59
or does not recollect the execution of the document, its execution may be proved by other evidence.
83. Proof of document not required by law to be attested. — An attested document not
required by law to be attested may be proved as if it was unattested.
84. Comparison of signature, writing or seal with others admitted or proved.—(1)
In order to ascertain whether a signature, writing or seal is that of the person by whom it purports to
have been written or made any signature, writing or seal admitted or proved to the satisfaction of the
Court to have been written or made by that person may be compared with the one which is to be proved,
although that signature, writing or seal has not been produced or proved for any other purpose.
11 12
(2) The  Court may  direct  any person  present  in  Court  to write  any  words  or  figures  for  the
purpose  of  enabling  the  Court  to  compare  the  words  or  figures  so  written  with  any  words  or  figures
alleged to have been written by such person.
(3) This Article applies also, with any necessary modifications, to finger-impressions.
85. Public documents. — The following documents are public documents: —
(1) documents forming the acts or records of the acts —
(i) of the sovereign authority;
(ii) of official bodies and tribunals, and
(iii) of public officers, legislative, Judicial and executive, of any part of Pakistan, or of a
foreign country;
(2) public records kept in Pakistan of private documents;
(3) documents forming part of the records of judicial proceedings;
(4) documents required to be maintained by a public servant under any law; and
(5) registered documents the execution whereof is not disputed.
1
[(6)  certificates  deposited  in  a  repository  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  the  Electronic
Transactions Ordinance, 2002.]
86. Private documents. — All other documents are private.
87. Certified copies of public documents.— Every public officer having the custody of a
public document, which any person has a right to inspect, shall give that person on demand a copy of it
on payment of the legal fees therefor, together with a certificate written at the foot of such copy that it
is a true copy of such document or part thereof, as the case may be, and such certificate shall be dated
and subscribed by such officer with his name and his official title, and shall be sealed, whenever such
officer is authorized by law to make use of a seal, and such copies so certified shall be called certified
copies.
1
Added new “Clause (6) in Article 85” by Ord. No. LI of 2002, s. 29 and schedule
Page 42 of 59
Explanation. —Any  officer,  who,  by  the  ordinary  course  of  official  duty,  is  authorized  to
deliver such copies, shall be deemed to have the custody of such documents within the meaning of this
Article.
88. Proof  of  documents  by  production  of  certified Copies. — Such  certified  copies
may be produced in proof of the contents of the public documents or parts of the public documents of
which they purport to be copies.
89. Proof of other public documents. — The following public documents may be proved
as follows:
(1) Acts, orders or notifications of the Federal Government in any of its departments, or of any
Provincial  Government  or  any  department  of  any  Provincial  Government—by  the  records  of  the
departments, certified by the heads of those departments respectively, or by any document purporting to
be printed by order of any such Government;
(2) the  proceedings  of  the Legislatures, —by  the  journal of those  bodies  respectively,  or  by
published Acts or abstracts, or by copies purporting to be printed by order of the Government concerned;
(3) the Acts of the Executive or the proceedings of the Legislature of a foreign country, – by
journals published by their authority, or commonly received in that country as such or by a copy certified
under the seal of the country or sovereign, or by a recognition thereof in some Federal Act;
(4) the proceedings of a municipal body in Pakistan, —by a copy of such proceedings, certified
by the legal keeper thereof, or by a  printed  book purporting to be  published by the  authority of such
body;
(5) public documents of any other class in a foreign country,—by the original, or by a copy
certified by the legal keeper thereof, with a certificate under the seal of a notary public, or of a Pakistan
Consul or diplomatic agent, that the copy is duly certified by the officer having the legal custody of the
original, and upon proof of the character of the document according to the law of the foreign country.
PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
90. Presumption as to genuineness of certified copies. — (1) The Court shall presume
every document purporting to be a certificate, certified copy or other document, which is by law declared
to be admissible as evidence of any particular fact and which purports to be duly certified by any officer
of the Federal Government or a Provincial Government to be genuine:
Provided  that  such  document  is  substantially  in  the  form  and  purports  to  be  executed  in  the
manner directed by law in that behalf.
(2) The Court shall also presume that any officer by whom any such document purports to be
signed or certified, held, when he signed it, the official character which he claims in such document.
91. Presumption as to documents produced as record of evidence.— Whenever any
document is produced before any Court, purporting to be a record or memorandum of the evidence, or
of any part of the evidence, given by a witness in a judicial proceeding or before any officer authorized
by law to take such evidence or to be a statement or confession by any prisoner or accused person, taken
in accordance with law, and purporting to be signed by any Judge or Magistrate or by any such officer
as aforesaid, the Court shall presume—
Page 43 of 59
that the document is genuine; that any statements as to the  circumstances under which it was
taken, purporting to be made by the person signing it, are true, and that such evidence, statement
or confession was duly taken.
92. Presumption as to genuineness of documents kept under any law. — The Court
shall presume the genuineness of every document purporting to be a document directed by any law to
be kept by any person, if such document is kept substantially in the form required by law and is produced
from proper custody.
93. Presumptions as to maps or plans made by authority of Government. — The
Court shall presume that map or plans purporting to be made by the authority of the Federal Government
or any Provincial Government were so made, and are accurate; but maps or plans made for the purposes
of any cause must be proved to be accurate.
94. Presumption as to collections of laws and reports of decision. — The Court shall
presume the genuineness of every book purporting to be printed or published under the authority of the
Government of any country, and to contain any of the laws of that country, and of every book purporting
to contain reports of decisions of the Courts of such country.
95. Presumption  as  to  powers-of-attorney. — The  Court  shall  presume  that  every
document purporting to be a power-of -attorney, and to have been executed before, and authenticated
by, a notary public, or any Court, Judge, Magistrate, Pakistan Consul or Vice-Consul, or representative
of the Federal Government, was so executed and authenticated.
96. Presumption  as  to  certified  copies  of  foreign  judicial  records.—(1)  The  Court
may presume that any document purporting to be a certified copy of any judicial record of any country
not  forming part  of  Pakistan  is  genuine  and  accurate,  if  the  document purports  to  be  certified  in  any
manner which is certified by any representative of the Federal Government in or for such country to be
the manner commonly in use in that country for the certification of copies of judicial records.
(2)  An  officer  who,  with  respect  to  any  territory  or  place  not  forming  part  of  Pakistan,  is  a
political  Agent  therefor,  as  defined  in  section  3,  clause  (40),  of  the  General  Clauses  Act,  1897(X  of
1897), shall for the purposes of clause (1), be deemed to be a representative of the Federal Government
in or for the country comprising that territory or place.
97. Presumption as to books, maps and charts.— The Court may presume that any book
to which it may refer for information on matters of public  or general interest, and that any published
map or chart, the statements of which are relevant facts and which is produced for its inspection, was
written and published by the person, and at the time and place, by whom or at which it purports to have
been written or published.
98. Presumption as to telegraphic messages. — The Court may presume that message,
forwarded  from  a  telegraph  office  to  the  person  to  whom  such  message  purports  to  be  addressed,
corresponds with a message delivered for transmission at the office from which the message purports to
be  sent;  but  the  Court  shall  not make  any  presumption  as  to the  person  by  whom  such  message  was
delivered for transmission.
99. Presumption as to due execution, etc., of documents not produced. — The Court
shall presume that every document, called for and not produced after notice to produce, was attested,
stamped and executed in the manner required by law.
Page 44 of 59
100. Presumption as to documents thirty years old.— Where any document, purporting
or proved to be thirty years old, is produced from any custody which the Court in the particular case
considers proper, the Court may presume that the signature and every other part of such document, which
purports to be in the handwriting of any particular person, is in that person’s handwriting, and, in the
case of a document executed or attested, that it was duly executed and attested by the persons by whom
it purports to be executed and attested.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this Article and Article 92, documents are sold to be in
proper custody if they are in the place in which, and under the care of the person with whom, they would
naturally  be;  but  no  custody  is  improper  if  it  is  proved  to  have  had  a  legitimate  origin,  or  if  the
circumstances of the particular case are such as to render such an origin probable.
Illustrations
(a) A  has  been  in  possession  of  landed  property  for  a  long  time.  He  produces  from  his
custody deeds relating to the land, showing his titles to it. The custody is proper.
(b) A produces deeds relating to landed property of which he is the mortgage. The
mortgagor is in possession. The custody is proper.
(c) A, a connection of B, produces deeds relating to lands in B’s possession which were
deposited with him by B for safe custody. The custody is proper.
101. Certified copies of documents thirty years old. — The provisions of Article 100
shall apply to such copy of a document referred to in that Article as is certified in the manner provided
in Article 87 and is not less than thirty years old; and such certified copy may be produced in proof of
the contents of the document or part of the document of which it purports to be a copy.
Page 45 of 59
CHAPTER VI
OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE