[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 110: Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act with different intention from that of

abettor. Whoever abets the commission of an offence shall, if the person abetted does the act with a
different intention or knowledge from that of the abettor, be punished with the punishment provided
for  the  offence  which would have  been  committed if the  act  had  been  done with the  intention  or
knowledge of the abettor and with no other.
111. Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act done. When an act is abetted
and a different act is done, the abettor is liable for the act done, in the same manner and to the same
extent as if he had directly abetted it :
1
This Section was added by the Indian Penal Code Amdt. Act, 1898 (4 of 1898), s. 3.
2
Subs. by the Central Laws (Statute Reform) Ordinance, 1960 (21 of 1960),s. 3 and 2nd Sch. (w.e.f. 14th October, 1955), for “the
Provinces and the Capital of the Federation” which had been subs. by A.O., 1949, Arts. 3(2) and 4, for “British India”.
3
Subs. by the criminal law (Amdt.), Act, 1997 (II of 1997), s. 6 for “full­stop”.
4
Proviso added ibid.
Proviso. Provided the act done was a probable consequence of the abetment, and was committed
under  the  influence  of  the  instigation,  or  with  the  aid  or  in  pursuance  of  the  conspiracy  which
constituted the abetment.
Illustrations
(a) A instigates a child to put poison into the food of Z, and gives him poison for that purpose.
The child, in consequence of the instigation,  by mistake puts the poison into the food of Y,
which is by  the side of that of Z. Here if the child was acting under the  influence of A's
instigation, and the act done was under the circumstances a probable consequence  of the
abetment A is liable in the same manner and to the same extent as if he had instigated the
child to put the poison into the food of Y.
(b) A instigates B to burn Z's house. B sets fire to the house and at the same time commits theft
of  property  there.  A,  though guilty of  abetting  the  burning  of  the  house, is not guilty of
abetting the theft ; for the theft was a distinct act, and not a probable consequence of the
burning.
(c) A instigates B and C to break into an inhabited house at midnight for the purpose of robbery,
and  provides  them with arms  for  that  purpose.  B  and  C  break  into  the  house,  and  being
resisted  by Z, one  of  the  inmates,  murder Z. Here, if that  murder  was  the  probable
consequence of the abetment, A is liable to the punishment provided for murder.
112. Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act abetted and for act done. If the act
for which the abettor is liable under the last preceding section is committed in addition to the act abetted,
and constitutes a distinct offence, the abettor is liable to punishment for each of the offences.
Illustration
A instigates B to resist by force a distress made by a public servant. B, in  consequence, resists that
distress.  In  offering  the  resistance,  B  voluntarily  causes  grievous  hurt  to  the  officer  executing  the
distress. As B has committed both the offence of resisting the distress, and the offence of voluntarily
causing grievous hurt, B is liable to punishment for both these offences ; and, if A new that B was likely
voluntarily to cause grievous hurt in resisting the distress A will also be liable to punishment for each
of the offences.