[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 337E: Ghayr-jaifah

ghayr-jaifah.
(1) Whoever causes jurh which does not amount to jaifah, is said to cause
(2) The following are the kinds of ghayr-jaifah, namely:
(a) Damiyah;
(b) badi’ah;
(c) mutalahimah;
(d) mudihah;
(e) hashimah; and
(f) munaqqilah.
(3) Whoever causes ghayr-jaifah
(i) in which the skin is ruptured and bleeding occurs, is said to cause damiyah ;
(ii) by cutting or incising the flesh without exposing the bone, is said to cause badi'ah ;
(iii) by lacerating the flesh, is said to cause mutalahimah;
(iv) by exposing the bone, is said to cause mudihah;
(v) by causing fracture of a bone without dislocating it, is said to cause hashimah; and
(vi) by fracturing and dislocating the bone, is said to cause munaqqilah.
337F. Punishment of ghayr-jaifah. Whoever by doing any act with the intention of causing
hurt to any person, or with the knowledge that he is likely to cause hurt to any person, causes
(i) damiyah to  any  person,  shall  be liable to daman and  may also be  punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year as ta'zir;
(ii)  badi’ah to  any  person,  shall  be liable to daman and  may also be  punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years as ta'zir;
(iii) mutalahimah to  any  person,  shall  be liable to daman and  may also be  punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years as ta'zir;
(iv) mudihah to any person, shall be liable to daman and may also be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years as ta'zir;
(v) hashimah to  any  person,  shall  be liable to daman and  may also be  punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years ; and
(vi)  munaqqilah to  any  person,  shall  be liable to daman and  may also be  punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years as ta'zir.
337G. Punishment for hurt by rash or negligent driving. Whoever causes hurt by rash or
negligent driving shall be liable to arsh or daman specified for the kind of hurt caused and may also be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years as ta'zir.
337H. Punishment for hurt by rash or negligent act. (1) Whoever causes hurt by rash or
negligent act, other than rash or negligent driving, shall be liable to arsh or daman specified for the
kind of hurt caused and may also be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years as ta'zir.
(2) Whoever does any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life or the personal safety
of others, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three months, or with fine, or with both.
337I. Punishment for causing hurt by   mistake (khata). Whoever causes hurt by mistake
(Khata) shall be liable to arsh or daman specified for the kind of hurt caused.
337J. Causing hurt by means of a poison. Whoever administers to, or causes to be taken by,
any person, any poison or any stupefying, intoxicating or unwholesome drug, or such other thing with
intent to cause hurt to such person, or with intent to commit or to facilitate the commission of an offence,
or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause hurt may, in addition to the punishment or arsh or
daman provided for the kind of hurt caused, be punished, having regard to the nature of the hurt caused,
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years.
337K. Causing hurt to extort confession, or to compel restoration of property. Whoever
causes hurt for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer or any person interested in the sufferer any
confession or any information which may lead to the detection of any offence or misconduct, or for the
purpose of constraining the sufferer, or any person interested in the sufferer, to restore, or to  cause the
restoration  of,  any  property  or  valuable  security  or  to  satisfy  any  claim  or  demand,  or  to give
information which may lead to the restoration of any property or valuable security shall, in addition to
the punishment of qisas, arsh or daman, as the case may be, provided for the kind of hurt caused, be
punished, having regard to the nature of the hurt caused, with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to ten years as ta’zir.
337L. Punishment for other hurt. (1) Whoever causes hurt, not mentioned hereinbefore,
which endangers life or which causes the suffer is to remain in severe bodily pain for twenty days or
more or renders him unable to follow his ordinary pursuits for twenty days or more, shall be liable to
daman and also be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years.
(2) Whoever causes hurt not covered  by sub-section (1) shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with daman or with both.