[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/wp-content/uploads/2026/01/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT-ORDER1984-Amendment-up-to-date-2025.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

QSO Section 149: Exclusion  of  evidence  to  contract  answers  to  questions  testing veracity

When a witness has been asked and has answered any question which is relevant to the inquiry only in
so far as it tends to shake his credit by injuring his character, no evidence shall be given to contradict
him; but, if he answers falsely, he may afterwards be charged with giving false evidence.
Exception 1. —If a witness is asked whether he has been previously convicted of any crime
denies it, evidence may be given of his previous conviction.
Exception 2. —If  a  witness  is  asked  any  question  tending  to  impeach  his  impartiality  and
answers it by denying the facts suggested, he may be contradicted.
Page 61 of 59
Illustrations
(a)  A claim against an underwriter is resisted on the ground of fraud.
The claimant is asked whether, in a former transaction, he had not made a fraudulent
claim. He denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that he did make such a claim. The evidence is inadvisable.
(b) A witness is asked whether he was not dismissed from a situation for dishonesty. He
denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that he was dismissed for dishonesty.
The evidence is not admissible.
(c) A affirms that on a certain day he saw B at Lahore.
A is asked whether he himself was not on that day at Faisalabad. He denies it. Evidence
is offered to show that A was on that day at Faisalabad.
The evidence is admissible, not as contradicting A on a fact which affects his credit,
but as contradicting the alleged fact that B was seen on the day in question in Lahore.
In each of these cases the witness might, if his denial was false, be charged with giving
false evidence.
(d) A is asked whether his family has not had a blood feud with the family of B against
whom he gives evidence.
He denies it. He may be contradicted on the ground that the question tends to impeach
his impartiality.
150. Question by party to his own witness. — The Court may, in its discretion, permit
the person who calls a witness to put any questions to him which might be put in cross-examination by
the adverse party.
151. Impeaching credit of witness. — The credit of a witness may be impeached in the
following ways by the adverse party, or, with the consent of the Court, by the party who calls him:
(1) by  the  evidence  of  persons  who  testify  that  they,  from  their  knowledge  of  the  witness,
believe him to be unworthy of credit;
(2) by  proof  that  the  witness  has  been  bribed,  or  has  accepted  the  offer  of  a  bribe,  or  has
received any other corrupt inducement to give his evidence;
(3) by proof of former statements inconsistent with any part of his evidence which is liable to
be contradicted;
[* * *****]
14
Explanation. —A witness declaring another witness to be unworthy of credit may not, upon his
examination-in-chief, give reasons for his belief, but he may be asked his reasons in cross-examination,
11
Omitted clause (4) of Article 151, by Act No. XLIV of 2016, s. 16.
Page 62 of 59
and the answers which he gives cannot be contradicted, though, if they are false, he may afterwards be
charged with giving false evidence.
Illustrations
(a) A sues B for the price of goods sold and delivered to B. C. says that A delivered the
goods to B.
Evidence  is  offered  to  show  that,  on  a  previous  occasion,  he  said  that  he  had  not
delivered the goods to B.
The evidence is admissible.
(b) A is indicated for the murder of B.
C says that B, when dying, declared that A had given B the wound of which he died.
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, C said that the wound was
not given by A or in his presence.
The evidence is admissible.
152. Questions tending to corroborate evidence of relevant fact admissible.— When
a witness whom it is intended to corroborate gives evidence of any relevant fact, he may be questioned
as to any other circumstances which he observed at or near to the time or place at which such relevant
fact  occurred  if  the  Court  is  of  opinion  that  such  circumstances,  if  proved,  would  corroborate  the
testimony of the witness as to the relevant fact which he testifies.
Illustration
A,  on  accomplice,  gives  an  account  of  robbery  in  which  he  took  part.  He  describes  various  incidents
unconnected with the robbery which occurred on his way to and from the place where it was committed.
Independent evidence of these facts may be given in order to corroborate his evidence as to the robbery
itself.