[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/CrPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

CrPC Section 182: Place of inquiry or trial where scene of offence is uncertain or not in one  district only or

where offence is continuing or consists of several acts. When it is uncertain in which of several local
areas an offence was committed, or
where an offence is committed partly in one local area and partly in another, or
where an offence is a continuing one, and continues to be committed in more local areas than one, or
where it consists of several acts done in different local areas, it may be inquired into or tried by a Court
having jurisdiction over any of such local areas.
183. Offence committed on a journey. An offence committed whilst the offender is in the course of
performing a journey or voyage may be inquired into or tried by a Court through or into the local limits of whose
jurisdiction the  offender,  or  the  person against  whom, or  the    thing in   respect    of  which,  the    offence  was
committed, passed in the course of that journey or voyage.
184. [Offences against Railway, Telegraph, Post Office and Arms Acts.] Rep. by the Federal Laws
(Rrevision and Declaration) Act, 1951 (XXVI of 1951), s. 3 and Second Schedule.
2
[185. High Court to decide, in case of doubt, district where inquiry or trial shall take place. (1)
Whenever a question arise as to which of two or more Courts subordinate to the same High Court ought to
inquire into or try any offence, it shall be decided by that High Court.
(2) Where two or more Courts not subordinate to the same High  Court have taken cognizance of the  same
offence, the High Court within the local limits of whose appellate criminal jurisdiction the proceedings were first
commenced may direct the trial of such offender to be held in any Court subordinate to it, and if it so decides
all other proceedings against such person in respect of such offence shall be discontinued. If such High Court,
upon the matter having been brought to its notice, does not so decide, any other High Court, within the local
limits of whose appellate criminal jurisdiction such proceedings are pending may give a like direction, and upon
its so doing all other such proceedings shall be discontinued.]