[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 423: Dishonest  or  fraudulent  execution  of  deed  of  transfer  containing  false  statement  of

consideration. Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently signs, executes or becomes a party to any deed or
instrument which purports to transfer or subject to any charge any property, or any interest therein, and
which contains any false statement relating to the consideration for such transfer or charge, or relating
to the person or persons for whose use or benefit it is really intended to operate, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
424. Dishonest  or  fraudulent  removal  or  concealment  of  property. Whoever  dishonestly  or
fraudulently  conceals  or  removes  any  property  of himself or  any  other  person,  or  dishonestly  or
fraudulently assists in the concealment or removal thereof, or dishonestly releases any demand or claim
to which he is entitled, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Of Mischief
425. Mischief. Whoever, with intent to cause, or ,knowing that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss
or damage to the public or to any person, causes the destruction of any property, or any such change in
any  property  or in the  situation  thereof  as  destroys  or diminishes its  value  or utility, or  affects it
injuriously, commits “mischief”.
Explanation 1. It is not essential to the offence of mischief that the offender should intend to
cause loss or damage to the owner of the property injured or destroyed. It is sufficient if he intends to
cause,  or  knows  that  he  is  likely  to  cause,  wrongful  loss  or  damage  to  any  person  by  injuring  any
property, whether it belongs to that person or not.
Explanation 2. Mischief may be committed by an act affecting property belonging to the person
who commits the act, or to that person and others jointly.
Illustrations
a. A voluntarily burns a valuable security belonging to Z intending to cause wrongful loss to
Z. A has committed mischief.
b. A  introduces  water  into  an  ice-house belonging to  Z  and  thus  causes  the  ice  to  melt,
intending wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
c. A voluntarily throws into a river a ring belonging to Z, with the intention of thereby causing
wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
d. A, knowing that his effects are about to be taken in execution in order to satisfy a debt  due
from him to Z, destroys  those  effects, with the  intention  of  thereby  preventing  Z  from
obtaining  satisfaction  of  the  debt,  and  of  thus  causing damage to Z. A  has  committed
mischief.
e. A having insured a ship, voluntarily causes the same to be cast away, with the intention of
causing damage to the underwriters. A has committed mischief.
f. A, causes a ship to be cast away, intending thereby to cause damage to Z who has lent money
on bottomry on the ship. A has committed mischief.
g. A,  having joint property with Z in a  horse,  shoots  the  horse,  intending  thereby  to  cause
wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
h. A causes cattle to enter upon a field belonging to Z, intending to cause and knowing that he
is likely to cause damage to Z’s crop. A has committed mischief.
426. Punishment for mischief. Whoever commits mischief shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine, or with both.
427. Mischief causing damage to  the amount of  fifty rupees. Whoever commits mischief and
thereby  causes loss or damage to  the  amount  of  fifty  rupees  or  upwards,  shall  be  punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
428. Mischief  by  killing  or  maiming animal  of  the  value  of  ten  rupees. Whoever commits
mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or rendering useless any animal or animals of the value of ten
rupees  or  upwards,  shall  be  punished with imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
429. Mischief by  killing or maiming cattle, etc.,  of any value or any animal of the value of
fifty  rupees. Whoever commits  mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or  rendering  useless,  any
elephant, camel, horse, mule, buffalo, bull, cow or ox, whatever may be the value thereof, or any other
animal of the value of fifty rupees or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
430. Mischief  by  injury  to  works  of  irrigation  or  by  wrongfully  diverting  water. Whoever
commits mischief by doing any act which causes, or which he knows to be likely to cause, a diminution
of the supply of water for agricultural purposes, or for food or drink for human beings or for animals
which  are  property,  or  for  cleanliness  or  for  carrying  on  any  manufacture,  shall  be  punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
431. Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, river, or channel. Whoever commits mischief
by  doing  any  act  which  renders  or  which  he  knows  to  be likely to  render  any public road, bridge,
navigable river  or navigable channel,  natural  or  artificial, impassable or less safe  for  travelling  or
conveying property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.