[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://khalidzafar.com/wp-content/files_mf/1527158791QanuneShahadatOrder1984.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-14

QSO Section 47: Relevancy of certain evidence for proving, in subsequent proceedings, the truth of facts

therein stated. Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or before any person
authorized by law to take it, is relevant for the purpose of proving, in a subsequent judicial
proceeding, or in a later stage of the same judicial proceeding, the truth of the facts which
states, when the witness is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of giving evidence, or is
kept out of the way by the adverse party, or if his presence cannot be obtained without an
amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, the Court considers
unreasonable:
Provided that—
the proceeding was between the same parties or their representatives-in-interest;
the adverse party in the first proceeding had the right and opportunity to cross-examine;
the questions in issue were substantially the same in the first as in the second proceeding.
Explanation. A criminal trial or inquiry shall be deemed to be a proceeding between the
prosecutor and the accused within the meaning of this Article.
STATEMENTS MADE UNDER SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
48. Entries in books of account when relevant. Entries in books of account, regularly kept in the
course of business, are relevant whenever they refer to a matter into which the Court has to
enquire, but such statements shall not alone be sufficient evidence to charge any person with
liability.
Illustration
A sues B for Rs. 1,000, and shows entries in his account books showing B to be indebted to him
to this amount. The entries are relevant, but are not sufficient, without other evidence, to prove
the debt.
COMMENTARY
Banker and customer. Entries in account of account-holder by bank alleged that credit entries in
the account of account-holder were made by Bank by oral instructions of the account-holders
thus making deviation from the rule or practice of the Bank. Burden would shift to the Bank
alleging aid deviation to prove that said credit entries were made on oral instructions of the
account-holder. Where the Bank failed to discharge the burden to prove the oral instructions,
presumption would be that account of account-holder was credited by the Bank only after
receiving the proper advice and cash.8
49. Relevancy of entry in public record made in performance of duty. An entry in any public or
other official book, register or record, stating a fact in issue or relevant fact, and made by a
public servant in the discharge of his official duty, or by any other person in performance of a
duty specially enjoined by the law of the country in which such book, register or record is kept,
is itself a relevant fact.
COMMENTARY
Entries in death register maintained in regular course of business would be conclusive.
Presumption of correctness of such entries shall prevail over conflicting entries about date of
death in inheritance mutation.9
Death entry made in 1918 when there was no dispute between parties. It remained in existence
ever since which enhanced its evidentiary value. Held; There was no warrant for Courts below
to have kept such death entry out of consideration.1
Long-standing entry made in Register of Deaths in 1918. Evidentiary value. Entry of death in
Register of Deaths kept as a public record and having remained in existence ever since 1918,
had enhanced its evidentiary value. Courts below in keeping such entry out of consideration had
committed an illegality justifying High Court to interfere in its revisional jurisdiction.2
Original register maintaining death entries. Such register on the face of it appeared to have
been duly maintained in regular course of business and contained death entry of person in
question. Entries in such register were relevant under Art. 49, Qanun-e-Shahadat, 1984.3
50. Relevancy of statements, in maps, charts and plans. Statements of facts in issue or relevant
facts made in published maps or charts generally offered for public sale, or in maps or plans
made under the authority of the Federal Government or any Provincial Government, as to
matters usually represented or stated in such maps, charts or plans, are themselves relevant
facts.