[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/CrPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CrPC Section 173: Report of police officer

1
[(1) Every investigation under this Chapter shall be completed without
unnecessary delay, and as soon as it is completed, the officer in charge of the police station shall
2
[,through the
Public Prosecutor,]
(a) forward to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence  on a  police report a  report,
in the form prescribed by the
3
[Provincial Government], setting forth the names of the parties, the
nature  of  the  information  and  the  names  of  the  persons  who  appear  to  be  acquainted  with  the
circumstances  of  the  case,  and  stating  whether  the  accused (if arrested)  has  been  forwarded in
custody or has been released on his bond, and, if so, whether with or without sureties, and
(b) communicate, in such  manner  as  may  be  prescribed  by  the
3
[Provincial  Government],  the  action
taken  by him to  the  person, if  any, by  whom  the  information  relating  to  the commission of  the
offence was first given [:]
2
2
[Provided  that,  where  investigation is not  completed within a  period  of  fourteen  days  from  the  date  of
recording of the first information report under section 154, the officer in charge of the police station shall, within
three days of the expiration of such period, forward to the Magistrate through the Public Prosecutor,  an interim
report in the form prescribed by the Provincial Government stating therein the result of the investigation made
until then and the
1
Subs. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 40, for the original sub-section (1).
2
Added & subs.by Act XXV of 1992, s. 2.
3
Subs. by A.O., 1937, for “L.G.”.
93
Court shall commence the trial on the basis of such interim report, unless, for reasons to be recorded, the
Court decides that the trial should not so commence.]
(2) Where a superior officer of police has been appointed under section 158, the report shall, in any cases
in which the
1
[Provincial Government] by general or special order so directs, be  submitted through that
officer, and he may, pending the orders of the Magistrate, direct the officer in charge of the police-  station to
make further investigation.
(3) Whenever it appears from a report forwarded under this section that  the  accused has been released  on
his bond, the Magistrate shall make such order for the discharge  of such bond or otherwise as he thinks  fit.
2
[(4) A copy of any report forwarded under this section shall, on application,  be  furnished  to  the accused
before the commencement of the inquiry or trial:
Provided that the same shall be paid for unless the Magistrate for some special reason  thinks fit  to furnish
it free of cost.]
3
[(5) Where the officer in charge of a police-station forwards a report under sub-section (1), he shall  along
with the report produce the witnesses in the case, except the public servants, and the Magistrate shall bind such
witnesses for appearance before him or some other Court on the date fixed for trial.]
174. Police  to  inquire  and report  on suicide, etc. (1) The officer in charge of a police-station or
some other police-officer specially empowered by the
1
[Provincial Government] in that behalf, on receiving
information that a person
(a) has committed suicide, or
(b) has been killed by another, or by an animal, or by machinery, or by an accident, or
(c) has died under circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that some other person has
committed an offence,
shall immediately give intimation thereof to the nearest Magistrate empowered to hold inquests, and, unless
otherwise directed by any rule prescribed by the
1
[Provincial Government],
4
[***]  shall proceed  to  the place
where the body of such deceased person is, and there, in the presence of two or more respectable inhabitants of
the neighbourhood, shall make an investigation, and draw up a report of the apparent cause of death, describing
such wounds, fractures, bruises and other marks of injury as may be  found on the  body  and stating in what
manner, or by what weapon or instrument (if any), such marks appear to have been inflicted.
(2) The report shall be signed by such police-officer and other persons, or by so many of them as concur
therein, and shall be forthwith forwarded to the
4
[concerned] Magistrate.
1
Subs. by A.O., 1937, for “L.G”.
2
Sub-section (4) ins. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 40.
3
Added by Act XXV of 1992, S. 2.
4
Subs. and omitted. by Ord. 37 of 2001, S. 51(w.e.f 14-08-2001).
Page 89 of 319
(3) When there is any doubt regarding the cause of death, or when for any other reason the police- officer
considers it expedient so to do, he shall, subject to such rules as the
1
[Provincial Government] may prescribe
in this behalf, forward the body, with a view to its being examined, to the nearest Civil Surgeon, or other qualified
medical  man  appointed in this  behalf  by  the
1
[Provincial  Government], if the  state  of  the  weather  and  the
distance admit of  its  being  so  forwarded  without risk of  such  putrefaction  on  the  road  as would render  such
examination useless.
2
* * * * *
3
["(5) [The Magistrates of the first class are empowered to hold inquests."]
4
[174A. Grievous injury by burns.
(1) where a person, grievously injured by burns through fire,
kerosene oil, acid,  chemical  or  by  any  other way, is brought  to  a  Medical  Officer  on  duty  designated  by  the
Provincial Government for this purpose or, such incident is reported to the Officer-in-Charge of a Police Station,
such Medical Officer on duty, or, as the case may be, Officer-in-Charge of Police Station, shall immediately give
intimation  thereof  to  the  nearest  Magistrates simultaneously, the  Medical  Officer  on  duty  shall  record  the
statement of the injured person immediately on arrival so as to ascertain the circumstances  and cause of the
burn injuries. The statement shall also be recorded by the Magistrate in case the injured person is still in a position
to make the statement.
(2) The Medical  Officer  on duty, or, as  the  case  may  be,  the  Magistrate,  before  recording  the  statement
under  sub-section  (1),  shall  satisfy himself that  the  injured  person is not  under  any  threat  or  duress. The
statement so recorded shall be forwarded to the Session Judge and also to the District Superintendent of  Police
and Officer-in-Charge of the Police Station, for such action as may be necessary under this Code.
(3) If  the  injured  person is unable,  for  any  reason,  to  make  the  statement,  before  the  Magistrate, his
statement  recorded  by  the  Medical  Officer  on  duty  under  sub-section(1)  shall  be  sent in sealed  cover  to  the
Magistrate  or  the  trial  court if  it  is other  than  the  Magistrate  and  may  be accepted in evidence  as  a  dying
declaration if the injured person expires.]
175. Power  to summon persons. (1) A police-officer proceeding under section 174 may, by order in
writing summon two or more persons as aforesaid for the purpose of the said investigation, and any other person
who appears to be acquainted with the facts of the  case. Every person so summoned shall be  bound  to attend
and to answer truly all questions other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency  to expose
him to a criminal charge, or to a penalty or forfeiture.
(2) If the facts do not disclose a cognizable offence to which section 170 applies, such persons shall not
be required by the police-officer to attend a Magistrate's Court.
176. Inquiry by Magistrate  into cause  of death. (1) When any person dies while in the custody of
the police, the nearest Magistrate empowered to hold inquests shall, and, in any other case mentioned in section
174,  clauses  (a),  (b)  and  (c)  of  sub-section  (1),  any  Magistrate  so  empowered  may  hold  an  inquiry    into  the
cause of death either instead of, or in addition to, the investigation held by the
1
Subs. by A.O. 1937, for "L. G."
2
Sub-section (4) omitted by A.O., 1949, Sch.
3
Subs. by Ord. 37 of 2001, S. 51 (w.e.f 14-08-2001).
4
Ins. by Ord. 64 of 2001, S. 2
Page 90 of 319
police-officer, and if he does so, he shall have all the powers in conducting it which he would have in holding an
inquiry  into  an  offence. The Magistrate  holding  such  an  inquiry  shall  record  the  evidence    taken    by him in
connection therewith in any of the manners hereinafter prescribed according to the  circumstances of the case.
(2) Power  to  disinter  corpses. Whenever  such  Magistrate  considers it expedient  to  make  an
examination of the dead body of any person who has been already interred, in order to discover the cause of his
death, the Magistrate may, cause the body to be disinterred and examined.
PART VI PROCEEDINGS IN PROSECUTIONS
CHAPTER XV
OF THE JURISDICTION OF THE CRIMINAL COURTS IN INQUIRIES AND
TRIALS.
A. ---Place of Inquiry or Trial
177. Ordinary place of inquiry and trial. Every offence shall ordinarily be inquired into and tried by
a Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction it was committed.
178. Power  to  order  cases  to  be  tried  in  different  sessions  divisions. Notwithstanding  anything
contained in section  177,  the
1
[Provincial  Government]  may  direct  that  any  cases  or  class  of  cases
2
[in  any
district sent for trial to a Court of Session may be tried in any sessions division]:
3
[Provided that such direction is not repugnant to any direction previously issued by the High  Court
under section 526 of this Code or any other law for the time being in force.]
179. Accused triable in, district where act is done or where consequence ensues. When a Person
is accused  of  the Commission of  any  offence  by  reason  of  anything  which  has  been  done,  and  of  any
consequence which has ensued, such offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court within the local limits  of
whose jurisdiction any such thing has been done, or any such consequence has ensued.
Illustrations
(a) A is wounded within the local limits of the jurisdiction of Court X, and dies within the local limits of
the jurisdiction of Court Z. The offence of the culpable homicide of A may be inquired into or tried
by X or Z.
(b) A is wounded within the local limits of the jurisdiction of Court X, and is, during ten days within the
local limits of the jurisdiction of Court Y, and during ten days more within the local limits of  the
jurisdiction of Court Z, unable in the local limits of the jurisdiction of either Court Y, or
1
Subs. by A.O., 1937, for “L.G”.
2
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2. and Sch., for “committed for trial in any district may be tried in any sessions division”.
3
Subs. ibid., for “Proviso” which had previously been amended by Act 13 of 1916, s.2 and Sch., A.O, 1937, A.O., 1961, Art 2 and sch. (w.e.f 23
rd
March, 1956) and A.O., 1964, Art. 2 and Sch.
Page 91 of 319
Court Z, to follow his ordinary pursuits. The offence of causing grievous hurt to A may be inquired into
or tried by X, Y or Z.
(c) A is put in fear of injury within the local limits of the jurisdiction of Court X, and is thereby induced,
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of Court Y, to deliver property to the  person who put  him in  fear. The
offence of extortion committed on A may be inquired into or tried either by X or Y.
(d) A  is  wounded  in  the
1
[State  of  Junagadh],  and  dies  of  his  wounds  in
2
[Karachi].  The  offence  of
causing A's death may be inquired into and tried in
2
[Karachi].
180. Place of trial where act is offence by reason of relation to other offence. When an act is an
offence by reason of its relation to any other act which is also an offence or which would  be  an offence  if  the
doer were capable of committing an offence, a charge of the first-mentioned offence  may be  inquired into or
tried by a Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction either act was done.
Illustrations
(a) A  charge  of  abetment  may  be  inquired  into  or  tried  either  by  the  Court within the  local limits of
whose jurisdiction the  abetment  was  committed,  or  by  the  Court within the  local limits of  whose
jurisdiction the offence abetted was committed.
(b) A charge of receiving or retaining stolen goods may be inquired into or tried either by the Court
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the goods were stolen, or by any Court within the  local
limits of whose jurisdiction any of them were at any time dishonestly received or retained.
(c) A charge of wrongfully concealing a person known to have been Kidnapped may be inquire into or
tried by the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the wrongful concealing, or by the
Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the kidnapping, took place.
181. Being a thug or belonging to a gang of dacoits, escape from custody, etc. (1) The offence of
being a thug, of being a thug and committing murder, of dacoity, of dacoity with murder, of having belonged
to a gang of dacoits, or of having escaped from custody, may be inquired into or tried by a Court within the
local limits of whose jurisdiction the person charged is.
(2) Criminal   misappropriation   and   criminal   breach   of   trust. The offence   of   criminal
misappropriation or of criminal breach of trust may be inquired into or tried by a Court within  the  local  limits
of whose jurisdiction any part of the property which is the subject of the offence was received or retained by the
accused person, or the offence was committed.
1
Subs. by the Central Laws (Statute Reform) Ordinance, 1960 (21 of 1960), s.3 and 2
nd
Sch., for “Native State of Baroda” (with effect from the 14
th
October, 1955).
2
Subs. ibid., for “Poona” (with effect from the 14
th
October, 1955).
Page 92 of 319
1
[(3)  Theft.  The  offence  of  theft,  or  any  offence  which  includes  theft  or  the  possession  of  stolen
property, may be inquired into or tried by a Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such offence was
committed or the property stolen was possessed by the thief or by any person who received or retained the same
knowing or having reason to believe it to be stolen.]
(4) Kidnapping and abduction. The offence of kidnapping or abduction may be  inquired into or tried
by  a  Court within the  local limits of  whose jurisdiction the  person  kidnapped  or  abducted  was  kidnapped  or
abducted or was conveyed or concealed or detained.