[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/wp-content/uploads/2026/01/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT-ORDER1984-Amendment-up-to-date-2025.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

QSO Section 46: Cases in which statement of relevant fact by person who is dead or cannot be

found, etc., is relevant.— Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who is
dead, or who cannot be found, or who has become incapable of giving evidence, or whose attendance
cannot be procured without an amount of delay or expense which under the circumstances of the case
appears to the Court unreasonable, are themselves relevant facts in the following cases:—
(1) When it relates to cause of death. — When the statement is made by a person as to the
cause of his death, or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death, in
cases in which the cause of that person’s death comes into question. Such statements are relevant
whether the person who made them was or was not, at the time when they were made, under expectation
of death, and whatever may be the nature of the proceeding in which the cause of his death comes into
question.
4
(2) Or is made in course of business.— When the statement was made by such person in the
ordinary course of business, and in particular when it consists of any entry or memorandum made by
him in books kept in the ordinary course of business, or in the discharge of professional duty; or of an
acknowledgment written or signed by him of the receipt of money, goods, securities or property of any
kind ; or of a document used in commerce written or signed by him; or of the date of a letter or other
document usually dated, written or signed by him.
(3) Or  against  interest  of maker. — When  the  statement  is  against  the  pecuniary  or
proprietary interest of the person making it, or when, if true, it would expose or would have exposed
him to a criminal prosecution or to a suit for damages.
(4) Or  gives  opinion  as  to  public  right  or  customs  or  matters  of  general  interest.—
When  the  statement  gives  the  opinion  of  any  such  person,  as  to  the  existence  of  any  public  right  or
custom or matter of public or general interest, of the existence, of which if it existed, he would have
been likely to be aware, and when such statement was made before any controversy as to such right,
custom or matter has arisen.
(5) Or relates to existence of relationship. — When the statement relates to the existence
of any relationship by blood, marriage or adoption between persons as to whose relationship by blood,
marriage or adoption the person making the statement had special means of knowledge, and when the
statement was made before question in dispute was raised.
(6) Or is made in will or deed relating to family affairs.— When the statement relates to
the existence of any relationship by blood, marriage or adoption between persons deceased, and is made
in any will or deed relating to the affairs of the family to which any such deceased person belonged, or
in any family pedigree, or upon any tombstone, family portrait or other thing on which such statements
are usually made and when such statement was made before the question in dispute was raised.
(7) Or In document relating to transaction mentioned in Article 26, paragraph (a).
— When  the  statement  is  contained  in  any  deed,  will  or  other  document  which  relates  to  any  such
Page 29 of
59
transaction as is mentioned in Article 26, paragraph (a).
(8) Or is made by several persons and expresses feelings relevant to matter in question.
— When the statement was made by a number of parsons, and expressed feelings  or impressions on
their part relevant to the matter in question.
Illustrations
(a) The  question  is,  whether  A  was  murdered  by  B;  or  A  dies  of  Injuries  received  in  a
transaction in the course of which she was ravished. The question is, whether she was
ravished by B; or
The question is, whether A was killed by B under such circumstances that a suit would
lie against B by A’s widow.
Statements made by A as to the cause of his or her death, referring respectively to the
murder, the rape and the actionable wrong under consideration are relevant facts.
(b) The question is as to the date of A’s birth.
An entry in the diary of a deceased surgeon regularly kept in the course of business,
stating that, on a given day, he attended A’s mother and delivered her of a son, is a
relevant fact.
(c) The question is, whether A was in Peshawar on a given day.
A  statement  in  the  diary  of  a  deceased  solicitor,  regularly  kept  in  the  course  of
business,  that  on  a  given  day  the  solicitor  attended  A  at  a  place  mentioned,  in
Peshawar, for the purpose of conferring with him upon specified business, is a relevant
fact.
(d) The question is, whether a ship sailed from Karachi harbour on a given day.
A  letter  written  by  a  deceased  member  of  a  merchant’s  firm  by  which  she  was
chartered  to  their  correspondents  in  London,  to  whom  the  cargo  was  consigned,
stating that the ship sailed on a given day from Karachi harbour is a relevant fact.
(e) The question is, whether rent was paid to A for certain land.
A letter from A’s deceased agent to A saying that he had received the rent on A’s
account and held it at A’s order, is a relevant fact.
(f) The question is, whether A and B were legally married.
The   statement   of   a   deceased   clergyman   that   he   married   them   under   such
circumstances, that the celebration would be a crime is relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A, a person who cannot be found, wrote a letter on a certain
day. The fact that a letter written by him is dated on that day is relevant.
(h) The question is, what was the cause of the wreck of a ship.
A  protest  made  by  the captain,  whose  attendance  cannot be  procured,  is  a  relevant
Page 30 of
59
fact.
(i) The question is, whether a given road is a public way.
A statement by A, a deceased headman of the village, that the road was public, is a
relevant fact.
(j) The question is, what was the price of grain on a certain day in a particular market.
A  statement  of  the  price,  made  by  a  deceased  banya  in  the  ordinary  course  of  his
business, is a relevant fact.
(k) The question is, whether A, who is dead, was the father of B.
A statement by A that B was his son is a relevant fact.
(l) The question is, what was the date of the birth of A.
A letter from A’s deceased father to a friend, announcing the birth of A on a given day,
is a relevant fact.
(m) The question is, whether and when, A and B were married.
An  entry  in  a  memorandum-book by C, the deceased father of B, of his daughter’s
marriage with A on a given date, is a relevant fact.
(n) A sues B for a libel expressed in a painted caricature exposed in a shop window. The
question  is  as  to  the  similarity  of  the  caricature  and  its  libellous  character.  The
remarks on a crowd of spectators on these points may be proved.
5
[46-A. Relevance of information generated, received or  recorded by  automated
information system. — Statements  in  the  form  of  electronic  documents  generated,  received  or
recorded by an automated information system while it is in working order, are relevant facts.]