[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CPC Section 138: Power of High Court to require evidence to be recorded in

English.– (1) The
4
[High Court] may, by notification in the
5
[official Gazette], direct
with respect to any Judge specified in the notification, or falling under a description
set forth therein, that evidence in cases in which an appeal is allowed shall be
taken down by him in the English language and in manner prescribed.
(2) Where a Judge is prevented by any sufficient reason from
complying with a direction under sub-section (1), he shall record the reason and
cause the evidence to be taken down in writing from his dictation in open Court.
139. Oath on affidavit by whom to be administered.– In the case of
any affidavit under this Code–
(a) any Court or Magistrate, or
(b) any officer or other person whom a High Court may appoint in this
behalf, or
1
Sub-section (4) was omitted by
the Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinances Order, 1949 (G.G.O. No. 4 of 1949), published
in the Gazette of Pakistan (Extraordinary), dated: 28 March 1949, pp. 223-283, Article 3 read with the Schedule. It was earlier
amended by  the  Government  of  India  (Adaptation  of  Indian  Laws)  Order,  1937,  published  in  the  Gazette  of  India
(Extraordinary), dated: 1 April 1937, pp. 75-344, Article 3 read with the First Schedule.
2
Substituted for the words “Local Government” by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, published
in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary), dated: 1 April 1937, pp. 75-344, Article 3 read with the First Schedule.
3
Substituted for the words “Local Government” by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, published
in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary), dated: 1 April 1937, pp. 75-344, Article 3 read with the First Schedule.
4
Substituted for the words “Local Government” by the Decentralization Act, 1914 (IV of 1914), s. 2 read with the Schedule.
5
Substituted  for  the  words  “local  official  Gazette” by  the  Government  of  India  (Adaptation  of  Indian  Laws) Order,  1937,
published in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary), dated: 1 April 1937, pp. 75-344, Article 3 read with the First Schedule.
(c) any officer appointed by any other Court which the
1
[Provincial
Government] has generally or specially empowered in this behalf,
may administer the oath to the deponent.
140. Assessors in causes of salvage, etc.–
(1) In any Admiralty or Vice-
admiralty cause of salvage, towage or collision, the Court, whether it be
exercising its original or its appellate jurisdiction, may, if it thinks fit, and shall upon
request of either party to such cause, summon to its assistance, in such manner
as it may direct or as may be prescribed, two competent assessors; and such
assessors shall attend and assist accordingly.
(2) Every such assessor shall receive such fees for his attendance, to be
paid by such of the parties as the Court may direct or as may be prescribed.
141. Miscellaneous proceedings.– The procedure provided in this Code in
regard to suits shall be followed, as far as it can be made applicable, in all
proceedings in any Court of civil jurisdiction.
142. Orders and notices to be in writing.– All orders and notices served on
or given to any person under the provisions of this Code shall be in writing.
143. Postage.– Postage, where chargeable on a notice, summons or letter
issued under this Code and forwarded by post, and the fee for registering the
same, shall be paid within a time to be fixed before the communication is made:
Provided that the
2
[Provincial Government]
3
[*  *  *  *  *  *  *  *], may remit such
postage, or fee, or both, or may prescribe a scale of court-fees to be levied in lieu
thereof.
144. Application for the restitution.–
(1) Where and in so far as a decree is
varied or reversed, the Court of first instance shall, on the application of any
party entitled to any benefit by way of restitution or otherwise, cause such
restitution to be made as will, so far as may be, place the parties in the position
which they would have occupied but for such decree or such part thereof as
has been varied or reversed; and, for this purpose, the Court may make any
orders, including orders for the refund of costs and for the payment of interest,
damages, compensation and mesne profits, which are properly consequential on
such variation or reversal.
(2) No suit shall be instituted for the purpose of obtaining any
restitution or other relief which could be obtained by application under sub-section
(1).
145. Enforcement of liability of surety.– Where any person has become liable
as surety–
(a) for the performance of any decree or any part thereof, or
(b) for the restitution of any property taken in execution of a decree, or
1
Substituted for the words “Local Government” by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, published
in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary), dated: 1 April 1937, pp. 75-344, Article 3 read with the First Schedule.
2
Substituted for the words “Local Government” by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, published
in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary), dated: 1 April 1937, pp. 75-344, Article 3 read with the First Schedule.
3
The words “with the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council” were omitted by the Devolution Act, 1920 (XXXVIII
of 1920), s. 2 read with the First Schedule.
(c) for the payment of any money, or for the fulfillment of any
condition imposed on any person, under an order of the Court in any
suit or in any proceeding consequent thereon,
the decree or order may be executed against him, to the extent to which
he has rendered himself personally liable, in the manner herein provided
for the execution of decrees, and such person shall, for the purposes of
appeal, be deemed a party within the meaning of section 47:
Provided that such notice as the Court in each case thinks sufficient has
been given to the surety.
146. Proceedings by or against representatives.– Save as otherwise
provided by this Code or by any law for the time being in force, where any
proceeding may be taken or application made by or against any person, then the
proceeding may be taken or the application may be made by or against any
person claiming under him.
147. Consent or agreement by person under disability.– In all suits to
which any person under disability is a party, any consent or agreement as to
any proceeding shall, if given or made with the express leave of the Court by the
next friend or guardian for the suit, have the same force and effect as if such
person were under no disability and had given such consent or made such
agreement.
148. Enlargement of time.– Where any period is fixed or granted by the Court
for the doing of any act prescribed or allowed by this Code, the Court may, in its
discretion, from time to, enlarge such period, even though the period originally
fixed or granted may have expired.
149. Power to make up deficiency of court-fees.– Where the whole or
any part of any fee prescribed for any document by the law for the time being in
force relating to court-fees has not been paid, the Court may, in its discretion, at
any stage, allow the person, by whom such fee is payable, to pay the whole or
part, as the case may be, of such court-fee; and upon such payment the
document, in respect of which such fee is payable, shall have the same force and
effect as if such fee had been paid in the first instance.
150. Transfer of business.– Save as otherwise provided, where the
business of any Court is transferred to any other Court, the Court to which the
business is so transferred shall have the same powers and shall perform the
same duties as those respectively conferred and imposed by or under this Code
upon the Court from which the business was so transferred.
151. Saving of inherent powers of Court.– Nothing in this Code shall be
deemed to limit or otherwise affect the inherent power of the Court
1
[,  to  be
exercised  after  recording  reasons  in  writing,] to make such orders as may be
necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent abuse of the process of the Court.
152. Amendment of judgments, decrees or orders.– Clerical or
arithmetical mistakes in judgments, decrees or orders or errors arising therein
from any accidental slip or omission may at any time be corrected by the Court
either of its own motion or on the application of any of the parties.
1
Inserted  by  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure  (Punjab  Amendment)  Act  2018  (XIV  of  2018),  published  in  the  Punjab  Gazette
(Extraordinary), dated: 20 March 2018, pp. 6695-6698, s. 20.
153. General power to amend.– The Court may at any time, and on such
terms as to costs or otherwise as it may think fit, amend any defect or error in
any proceeding in a suit; and all necessary amendments shall be made for the
purpose of determining the real question or issue raised by or depending on
such proceeding.
1
[154. Saving of present right of appeal.– * * * * * *   ]
2
[155. Amendment of certain Acts.– * * * * * * *   ]
3
[156. Repeals.– * * * * * * * * * *   ]
157. Continuance of orders under repealed enactments.– Notifications
published, declarations and rules made, places appointed, agreements filed,
scales prescribed, forms framed, appointments made and powers conferred
under Act VIII of 1859 or under any Code of Civil Procedure or any Act amending
the same or under any other enactment hereby repealed shall, so far as they
are consistent with this Code, have the same force and effect as if they had
been respectively published, made, appointed, filed, prescribed, framed and
conferred under this Code and by the authority empowered thereby in such
behalf.