[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://na.gov.pk/uploads/documents/6926e060076ed_467.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

Constitution Section 121: The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged

upon the Provincial Consolidated Fund:–
(a)    the remuneration payable to the Governor and other
expenditure   relating   to   his   office,   and   the
remuneration payable to–
(i)    the Judges of the High Court; and
(ii)    the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the
Provincial Assembly;
(b)    the   administrative   expenses,   including   the
remuneration payable to officers and servants, of the
High Court and the Secretariat of the Provincial
Assembly;
(c)    all debt charges for which the Provincial Government
is liable, including interest, sinking fund charges, the
repayment or amortisation of capital, and other
expenditure in connection with the raising of loans,
and the service and redemption of debt on the security
of the Provincial Consolidated Fund;
Annual Budget
Statement.
Expenditure
charged upon
Provincial
Consolidated
Fund.
64                         CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
(d)    any sums required to satisfy any judgement, decree or
award against the Province by any court or tribunal;
and
(e)    any other sums declared by the Constitution or by Act
of the Provincial Assembly to be so charged.
122. (1)    So much of the Annual Budget Statement as relates to
expenditure charged upon the Provincial Consolidated Fund may
be discussed in, but shall not be submitted to the vote of, the
Provincial Assembly.
(2)    So much of the Annual Budget Statement as relates to
other expenditure shall be submitted to the Provincial Assembly
in the form of demands for grants, and that Assembly shall have
power to assent to, or to refuse to assent to, any demand, or to
assent to any demand subject to a reduction of the amount
specified therein:
1
*     *     *     *     *     *     *
(3)    No demand for a grant shall be made except on the
recommendation of the Provincial Government.
123. (1)    The Chief Minister shall authenticate by his signature
a schedule specifying–
(a)    the grants made or deemed to have been made by the
Provincial Assembly under Article 122; and
(b)    the several sums required to meet the expenditure
charged upon the Provincial Consolidated Fund but
not exceeding, in the case of any sum, the sum shown
in the statement previously laid before the Assembly.
(2)    The schedule so authenticated shall be laid before the
Provincial Assembly, but shall not be open to discussion or vote
thereon.
(3)    Subject to the Constitution, no expenditure from the
Provincial Consolidated Fund shall be deemed to be duly
Procedure
relating to
Annual Budget
Statement.
Authentication
of schedule of
authorized
expenditure.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN                        65
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Proviso omitted by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 39.
authorized unless it is specified in the schedule so authenticated
and such schedule is laid before the Provincial Assembly as
required by clause (2).