[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/CrPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

CrPC Section 123: Imprisonment in default of security

(1) If any person ordered to give security under section
106 or section 118 does not give such security on or before the date on which the period for which such security
is to be given commences, he shall, except in the case next hereinafter mentioned, be committed to prison, or,
if he is already in prison be detained in prison until such period expires or until within such period he gives the
security to the Court or Magistrate who made the order requiring it.
(2) Proceedings when to be laid before High Court or Court of Sessions. When such person has
been ordered by a Magistrate to give security for a period exceeding one year,such Magistrate  shall,  if  such
person does not give such security as aforesaid, issue a warrant directing him to be  detained  in  prison pending
the orders of the Sessions Judge
2
* * * ;and the proceedings shall be laid, as soon as conveniently may be, before
3
[such Judge].
(3)
3
[The Sessions Judge], after examining such proceedings and requiring from the Magistrate any further
information or evidence which
4
[he] thinks necessary, may pass such order on the case  as
4
[he]  thinks fit :
Provided that the period (if any) for which any person is imprisoned for failure to give security shall not
exceed three years.
5
[(3A)  If  security  has  been  required in the  course  of  the  same  proceedings  from  two  or  more  persons in
respect of any one of whom the proceedings are referred to the Sessions Judge
6
* * * under sub-section (2), such
reference shall also include the case of any other of such persons who has been  ordered  to  give security, and
the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) shall, in that event, apply to the case of such other person also, except
that the period (if any) for which he may be imprisoned shall not exceed the period for which he was ordered to
give security.
(3B) A Sessions Judge may in his discretion transfer any proceedings laid before him under sub-section
(2) or sub-section (3A) to an Additional Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge and upon such transfer, such
Additional Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge may exercise the powers of a Sessions Judge  under this
section in respect of such proceedings.]
1
Ss. 112 to 121 and 123 to 126 and s. 514 apply to all cases requiring security for good behaviour under s. 6 of the Punjab Frontier Crossing Regulation, 1873 (7 of 1873).
2
The words and commas “ or, if such Magistrate is Presidency Magistrate, pending the orders of the High Court “ omitted by A.O., 1949, Sch.
3
Subs. Ibid., for “such Court”.
4
Subs. Ibid., for “ it ”.
5
Sub-sections (3A) and (3B) ins. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s.21.
6
The words “or the High Court” omitted by A.O., 1949, Sch.
68
(4) If the security is tendered to the officer in charge of the jail, he shall forthwith refer the matter to the
Court or Magistrate who made the order, and shall await the orders of such Court or Magistrate.
(5) Kind  of  imprisonment. Imprisonment  for  failure  to give security  for  keeping  the  peace  shall  be
simple.
(6) Imprisonment for failure to give security for good behaviour
1
[shall, where the  proceedings have  been
taken under section 108
2
* * * be simple and, where the proceedings have been taken under
3
[section 109 or]
section 110], be rigorous or simple as the Court or Magistrate in each case directs.
4