[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 369: Kidnapping  or  abducting  child  under  ten  years  with  intent  to  steal  from  its  persons

Whoever kidnaps or abducts any child under the age of ten years with the intention of taking dishonestly
any moveable property from the person of such child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
4
[369A. Omitted]
).]
370. Buying or disposing  of any person as  a slave. Whoever imports, exports,  removes, buys,
sells or disposes of any person as a slave, or accepts, receives or detains against his will any person as
a slave, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
371. Habitual  dealing  in  slaves. Whoever  habitually imports, exports,  removes,  buys, sells,
traffics or deals in slaves, shall be punished with
5
[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either
description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
1
Section 366B as amended by A. 0., 1949, Ord. 21 of 1960. Ord. 1 of 1961 have been subs. by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Ordinance,
1981 (27 of 1981), s. 3 and II Sch., to read as above.
2
The words “or to the unnatural lust of any person,” omitted by the Offences of Zina (Enforcement of Hudood) Ordinance, 1979 (7 of 1979),s.19
(w.e.f. 10th Fehruary,1979).
3
Ins. by Act VI of 06, ss. 2 & 3.
4 Omitted by Fed.Act.No. XXXIV of 2018, Sect.16(3) dt.1
st
June, 2018.
5
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
1
[371A. Selling person for purpose of prostitution, etc.  Whoever sells, lets to hire, or otherwise
disposes  of any person with intent that such  person  shall  at any time be  employed  or  used  for the purpose  of
prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person or for any unlawful and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be
likely that such  person will at any time be  employed  or  used  for any such  purpose,  shall  be punished with
imprisonment which may extend to twenty-five years, and shall also be liable to fine.]
Explanations. (a) When a female is sold, let for hire, or otherwise disposed of to a prostitute or to any
person  who  keeps  or  manages  a  brothel,  the  person  so disposing  of  such  female  shall,  until  the  contrary  is
proved, be presumed to have disposed of her with the intent that she shall be used for the purpose of prostitution.
(b) For the purposes of this section and section 371B, “illicit intercourse” means sexual intercourse between
persons not united by marriage.
1
[371B. Buying person for purpose of prostitution, etc.  Whoever buys, hires or otherwise obtains
possession of any person with intent that such person shall at any time be employed or used for the purpose of
prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person or for any unlawful and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be
likely that such  person will at any time be  employed  or  used  for any such  purpose,  shall  be punished with
imprisonment which may extend to twenty-five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation. Any prostitution or any person keeping or managing a brothel, who buys, hires or otherwise
obtains possession of a female shall, until the contrary is proved, be presumed to have obtained possession of such
female with the intent that she shall be used for the purpose of prostitution.]
2
[372. [Selling minor for purposes of prostitution, etc.] Rep. by the Offences of Zina (Enforcement of
Hudood) Ordinance, 1979 (VIl of 1979), s. 19 (w.e.f. the 10th day of February, 1979).]
2
[373. [Buying minor for purposes of prostitution, etc.] Rep. by the Offences of Zina (Enforcement of
Hudood) Ordinance, 1979 (VlI of 1979), s. 19 (w.e.f the 10th day of February, 1979).]
3
[374.    Unlawful compulsory labour. (1) Whoever unlawfully compels any person to labour against
the will  of  that  person,  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.]
4
[(2) Whoever compels a prisoner of war or a protected person to serve in the armed forces of Pakistan shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year.
Explanation. In this section the expressions “prisoner of war” and “protected person” shall have the same
meaning  as  have  been  assigned  to  them  respectively  by  Article  4  of  the  Geneva  Convention  Relative  to  the
Treatment  of  prisoners  of  War  of August  12,  1949,  and  Article  4  of  the  Geneva  Convention  Relative  to  the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of August 12, 1949,  ratified by Pakistan on the second June,
1951.]
1
Ins. by Act. VI of 06, s. 4.
2
This section was amended by the Indian Penal Code (Amdt.) Act, 1924 (5 of 1924) s. 2 and the Indian Criminal Law (Amdt.) Act, 1924 (18 of 1924), s.2.
3
S. 374 was re-numbered as sub-section (1) of that section by the Pakistan Penal Code (Amdt.) Act, 1958 (36 of 1958), s. 2.
4
Sub-section (2) added by the Pakistan Penal Code (Amdt.) Act, 1958 (36 of 1958), s. 2.
5
Ins. by Act VI of 2016, s. 5.
Of Rape
1
[375. Rape. -  A person A is said to commit “rape” if A-
(a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of another person B or
makes B to do so with A or any other person; or
(b) inserts,  to any extent, any object or a part  of the body, not being the penis, into the vagina, the
urethra or anus of B or makes B to do so with A or any other person; or
(c) manipulates any part of the body of B so as to cause penetration into the vagina, urethra, anus or
any part of body of B or makes B to do so with A or any other person; or
(d) applies his mouth to the vagina, anus, urethra or penis of B or makes B to do so with A or any
other person, under the circumstances falling under any of the following seven descriptions, ―
firstly, against B’s will;
secondly, without B’s consent;
thirdly, with B’s consent, which has been obtained by putting B or any person in whom B is interested,
in fear of death or of hurt;
fourthly, with B’s consent, when A knows that A is not B’s husband and that B’s consent is given because
B believes that A is another man to whom B is or believes herself to be lawfully married;
fifthly, with B’s consent when, at the time of giving such consent, by reason of unsoundness of mind or
intoxication or the administration by A personally or through another of any stupefying or unwholesome
substance, B is unable to understand the nature and consequences of that to which B gives consent;
sixthly, with or without B’s consent, when B is under sixteen years of age; or
seventhly, when B is unable to communicate consent.
Explanation 1.- For the purposes of this section, “vagina” shall also include labia majora.
Explanation 2.- Consent means an unequivocal voluntary agreement when B by words, gestures
or any form of verbal or non-verbal communication, communicates willingness to participate in
the specific sexual act:
Provided that if B who does not physically resists to the act of penetration, it shall not by the reason only
of that fact, be regarded as consenting to the sexual activity.
Explanation 3.- In this Chapter, -
“person” means male, female or transgender; and “rape” includes “gang rape”.
Explanation 4. - A bonafide medical procedure or intervention shall not constitute rape.
2
[375A. Gang rape. - Where a person is raped by one or more persons constituting a group or acting in
furtherance of a common intention, each of those persons shall be guilty of the offence of gang  rape
and  shall  be  punished  with  death  or  for  imprisonment  for  the  remainder period  of  natural  life  or
imprisonment for life and fine.
376.   Punishment for rape. (1) Whoever commits rape shall be punished with death or imprisonment
of either description for a term which shall not be less than ten years or more than twenty-five years 3[or
for imprisonment for the remainder period of his natural life] and fine shall also be liable to fine.
1. Sect.375 substituted by Fed.Act.No. LVI of 2021, Sect.2 dt, 4
th
December,2021.
2. New Section 375A, Inserted by Fed.Act.No. LVI of 2021, Sect.3 dt, 4
th
December,2021.
3. Inserted by Fed.Act.No. LVI of 2021, Sect.4 dt, 4
th
December,2021.
1[(1A) Whoever commits an offence punishable under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or section 377
or section 377B and in the course of such commission causes any hurt punishable as an offence under
section 333, section 335, clauses (iv), (v) and (vi) of sub-section (3) of section 337, section 337C, clauses
(v) and (vi) of section 337F shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life and fine.]
(2)
3
[Omitted.]
2
[(3) Whoever commits rape of a minor or a person with mental or physical disability shall be
punished with death or imprisonment for life and fine.]
(4)  Whoever  being  a  public  servant  including  a  police  officer,  medical  officer  or  jailor,  taking
advantage of his official position, commits rape shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life
and fine.]
4
[376A. Disclosure of identity of victim of rape, etc.
(1) Whoever  prints  or  publishes  name or  any  matter  which  may  make  known  identity  of victim,
against whom an offence under sections 354A, 376, 376A, 377 and 377B is alleged or found to
have been committed, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Nothing is sub-section (1) extends to any printing or publication if it is
(a) by  or  under  order in writing of  officer-in-charge  of  the police station  or police officer
making  investigation into  such  offence  acting in good faith  for  the  purposes  of  such
investigation; or
(b) by or under order of Court; or
(c) by or with authorization in writing of the victim; or
(d) by or with the authorization in writing of natural or legal guardian of the victim where the
victim is dead or a minor or of unsound mind.
Explanation. Printing or publication of judgment of any High Court, the Federal Shariat Court
or the Supreme Court in law journals does not amount to an offence within the meaning of this section.]
Of Unnatural Offences
377. Unnatural offences. Whoever voluntarily has carnal intercourse against the order of nature
with any  man,  woman  or animal, shall  be  punished with
1
[imprisonment for life,] or with
imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term  which
2
[shall  not  be less than  two  years  nor  more
than] ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation. Penetration is sufficient to constitute the carnal intercourse necessary to the
offence described in this section.
1. Sub-section (1A) Ins. by Act XLIV of 2016, s.5 and 6.
2. Sub-section (3) and (4) Ins. by Act XLIV of 2016, s.5.
3. Sub-Section (2) of 376 omitted by Fed.Act.No. LVI of 2021, s.4(A) dt, 4
th
December,2021.
4. Section 376A Ins. by Act XLIV of 2016, 6.
3
[377A. Sexual abuse. Whoever employs, uses, forces, persuades, induces, entices, or coerces any
person to engage in, or assist any other person to engage in fondling, stroking, caressing, exhibitionism,
voyeurism  or  any  obscene  or  sexually explicit conduct  or simulation of  such  conduct  either
independently or in conjunction with other acts, with or without consent where age of person is less
than eighteen years, is said to commit the offence of sexual abuse.
377B.  Punishment. Whoever  commits  the  offence  of  sexual  abuse  shall  be  punished  with
imprisonment of either description for a term which 4
th
[shall not be less than fourteen years and may
extend up twenty years and with fine which shall not be less than one million rupees.]
CHAPTER XVII
OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY
Of Theft
378. Theft. Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any moveable property out of the possession of
any person without that person's consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to
commit theft.
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
2
Ins. by Act VI of 06, s. 5.
3
Ins. by Act X of 2016, s. 7.
4
th
Subs. by Criminal law (Amendment) Act No. XXVII of 2018, Sec.3 dt 24
th
May, 2018.
Explanation 1. A thing so long as it is attached to the earth, not being moveable property, is not
the subject of theft; but it becomes capable of being the subject of theft as soon as it is severed from
the earth.
Explanation 2.
Explanation 3.       A moving effected by the same act which effects the severance may be a theft.
A person is said to cause a thing to move by removing an obstacle which
prevented it from moving or by separating it from any other thing, as well as by actually moving it.
Explanation 4. A person, who by any means causes an animal to move, is said to move that
animal, and to move everything which, in consequence of the motion so caused, is moved by that animal.
Explanation 5. The consent mentioned in the definition may be expressed or implied, and may
be given either by the person in possession, or by any person having for that purpose authority either
express or implied.
Illustrations
• A cuts down a tree on Z’s ground, with the intention of dishonestly taking
the tree out of Z’s possession without Z's consent. Here, as soon as A has
severed the tree in order to such taking, he has committed theft.
• A puts a bait for dogs in his pocket, and thus induces Z’s dog to follow it.
Here, if A's intention be dishonestly to take the dog out of Z’s possession
without Z’s consent, A has committed theft as soon as Z’s dog has begun to
follow A.
• A  meets  a  bullock  carrying  a  box  of  treasure.  He  drives  the  bullock in a
certain direction, in order that he may dishonestly take the treasure. As soon
as the bullock begins to move, A has committed theft of the treasure.
• A  being Z’s servant,  and  entrusted  by  Z with the  care  of Z’s plate,
dishonestly runs away with the plate, without Z’s consent. A has committed
theft.
• Z, going on a journey, entrusts his plate to A, the keeper of a warehouse, till
Z shall return. A carries the plate to a goldsmith and sells it. Here the plate
was  not in Z’s possession.  It  could  not  therefore  be  taken  out  of Z’s
possession and A has not committed theft, though he may have committed
criminal breach of trust.
• A finds a ring belonging to Z on a table in the house which Z occupies. Here
the ring is in Z’s possession, and if A dishonestly removes it, A commits
theft.
• A finds a ring lying on the high-road, not in the possession of any person.
A,  by  taking  it, commits no  theft,  though  he  may commit criminal
misappropriation of property.
• A sees a ring belonging to Z lying on a table in Z’s house. Not venturing to
misappropriate  the  ring immediately for  fear  of  search  and  detection,  A
hides the  ring in a place where it is highly improbable that it will ever be
found by Z, with the intention of taking the ring from the hiding place and
selling it when the loss is forgotten. Here A, at the time of first moving the
ring, commits theft.
• A delivers his watch to Z, a jeweller, to be regulated. Z carries it to his shop.
A, not owing to the jeweller any debt for which the jeweller might lawfully
detain  the  watch  as  a security, enters  the  shop openly, takes his watch  by
force  out  of Z’s hand,  and  carries it away. Here  A,  though  he  may  have
committed criminal trespass and assault, has not committed theft, in as much
as what he did was not done dishonestly.
• If A owns money to Z for repairing the watch, and if Z retains the watch
lawfully as  a  security  for  the  debt,  and  A  takes  the  watch  out  of Z’s
possession, with the intention of depriving Z of the property as a security
for his debt, he commits theft, inasmuch as he takes it dishonestly.
• Again, if A,  having  pawned his watch  to Z, takes it out  of Z’s possession
without Z's consent, not having paid what he borrowed on the watch, be
commits theft, though the watch is his own property inasmuch as he takes it
dishonestly.
• A takes an article belonging to Z out of Z’s possession with out Z’s consent,
with the intention of keeping it until he obtains money from Z as a reward
for its restoration. Here A takes dishonestly ; A has therefore committed
theft.
• A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes in to Z’s library in Z’s absence, and
takes away a book without Z’s express consent for the purpose merely of
reading it, and with the intention of returning it. Here, it is probable than A
may have conceived that he had Z’s implied consent to use Z’s book. If this
was A's impression, A has not committed theft.
• A asks charity from Z’s wife. She gives A money, food and clothes, which
A  knows  to  belong  to  Z  her  husband.  Here it  is probable  that  A  may
conceive  that Z’s wife is authorized  to give away alms. If  this  was A’s
impression, A has not committed theft.
• A is the  paramour  of Z’s wife. She gives A  valuable  property,  which  A
knows to belong to her husband Z, and to be such property as she has not
authority  from  Z  to give. If  A  takes  the  property dishonestly, he commits
theft.
• A, in good faith, believing property belonging to Z to be A’s own property,
takes  that  property  out  of B’s possession.  Here,  as  A  does  not  take
dishonestly, he does not commit theft.
379. Punishment for theft. Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine or with both.
380. Theft in dwelling house. etc. Whoever commits theft in any building, tent or vessel, which
building, tent or vessel is used as a human dwelling, or used for the custody of property shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
381. Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of master. Whoever being a clerk or
servant, or being employed in the capacity of a clerk or servant, commits theft in respect of any property
in the possession of his master or employer shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
1
[381A. Theft of a car or other motor vehicles.
Whoever commits theft of a car or any other
motor vehicle, including motor-cycle, scooter and Tractor shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years and with fine not exceeding the value of the
stolen car or motor vehicle.]
2
[Explanation. Theft  of an electric  motor of a  tube  well or transformer shall be within the
meaning of this section.]