[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 404: Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased person at the time of his

death. Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use property, knowing that such
property was in the possession of a deceased  person at the time of that person's decease  and has not
since been in the possession of any person legally entitled to such possession, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable
to fine; and if the offender  at  the time of such person’s decease was employed by him as  a  clerk  or
servant, the imprisonment may extend to seven years.
Illustration
Z  dies  in  possession  of  furniture  and  money.  His  servant  A,  before  the  money  comes  into  the
possession of any person entitled to such possession, dishonestly misappropriates it. A has committed
the offence defined in this section.
Of Criminal Breach of Trust
405. Criminal breach of trust. Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property or with any
dominion over  property,  dishonestly  misappropriates  or  converts  to his own  use  that  property,  or
dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode
in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied, which he has made
touching the discharge of such trust, or wilfully suffers any other person so to do, commits “criminal
breach of trust”.
Illustrations
a. A,  being  executor  to  the will of  a  deceased  person,  dishonestly  disobeys  the  law  which
directs him to divide the effects according to the will, and appropriates them to his own
use. A has committed criminal breach of trust.
b. A is a warehouse-keeper. Z, going on a journey, entrusts his furniture to A, under a contract
that it shall be returned on payment of a stipulated sum for warehouse-room. A dishonestly
sells the goods. A has committed criminal breach of trust.
c. A, residing in
1
[Dacca], is agent for Z, residing at
2
[Lahore]. There is an express or  implied
contract  between  A  and Z, that  all sums remitted  by  Z  to  A  shall  be  invested  by    A,
according to Z’s direction. Z, remits a lakh of rupees to A, with directions to A to invest
the same in Company’s paper.  A  dishonestly  disobeys  the  directions  and  employs  the
money in his own business. A has committed criminal breach of trust.
d. But if A, in the last illustration, not dishonestly but in good faith, believing that it will be
more for Z’s advantage to hold shares in the Bank of Bengal, disobeys Z’s directions, and
buys shares in the Bank of Bengal, for Z, instead of buying Company’s paper, here, though
Z should suffer loss, and should be entitled to bring a civil action against A, on account of
that loss, yet A, not having acted dishonestly, has not committed criminal breach of trust.
e. A, a revenue-officer, is entrusted with public money and is either directed by law, or bound
by a contract, express or implied, with the Government, to pay into a certain treasury all
the public money which he holds. A dishonestly appropriates the money. A has committed
criminal breach of trust.
f. A, a carrier, is entrused by Z with property to be carried by land or by water. A dishonestly
misappropriates the property. A has committed criminal breach of trust.
406. Punishment for criminal breach of trust. Whoever commits criminal breach of trust shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
3
[seven] years, or
with fine, or with both.
407. Criminal  breach  of  trust  by  carrier,  etc. Whoever,  being  entrusted with property  as  a
carrier, whar finger or ware house-keeper, commits criminal breach of trust in respect of such property,
shall be punished with imprisonment or either description for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
408. Criminal  breach  of  trust  by  clerk  or  servant. Whoever,  being  a  clerk  or  servant  or
employed as a clerk or servant, and being in any manner entrusted in such capacity with property, or
with any dominion over property, commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that property, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
409. Criminal breach of trust by public servant, or by banker, merchant or agent. Whoever,
being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property in his capacity of a
public servant  or in the way of his business as a banker, merchant, factor, broker, attorney or agent,
commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that property, shall be punished with
4
[imprisonment for
life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
1
Subs. by the Federal Laws Revision and Declaration Act, 1951 (26 of 1951), s. 4 and III Sch., for “Calcutta”.
2
Subs. ibid., for “Delhi”.
3
Subs. by Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 1981 (33 of 1981), s.2, for “three”.
4
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
Of the Receiving of Stolen Property
410. Stolen  property. Property,  the possession whereof  has  been  transferred  by  theft,  or  by
extortion, or by robbery, and property which has been criminally misappropriated or in respect of which
1
* * * criminal breach of trust has been committed, is designated as “stolen property”,
2
[whether the
transfer  has  been  made,  or  the  misappropriation  or  breach  of  trust  has  been  committed, within or
without
3
[Pakistan]]. But, if such property subsequently comes into the possession of a person legally
entitled to the possession thereof, it then ceases to be stolen property.
411. Dishonestly receiving stolen property. Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen
property, knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen property, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to  three years, or with fine, or with
both.
412. Dishonestly  receiving  property  stolen  in  the  commission  of  a  decoity. Whoever
dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property, the possession whereof he knows or has reason to
believe to have been transferred by the commission of decoity, or dishonestly receives from a person,
whom he knows or has reason to believe to belong or to have belonged to a gang of dacoits, property
which he knows or has reason to believe to have been stolen, shall be punished with
4
[imprisonment
for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
413. Habitually  dealing  in  stolen  property. Whoever  habitually  receives  or  deals in property
which he knows or has reason to believe to be stolen property, shall be punished with
4
[imprisonment
for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
414. Assisting in concealment of stolen property. Whoever voluntarily assists in concealing or
disposing of  or making away with property  which  he  knows  or  has  reason  to  believe  to  be  stolen
property,  shall  be  punished with imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to
three years, or with fine, or with both.
Of Cheating
415. Cheating. Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonest1y induces the person
so  deceived  to  deliver  any  property  to  any  person,  or  to  consent  that  any  person  shall  retain  any
property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would
not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to  cause damage
or harm to that person
5
[or any other person] in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to “cheat”.
1
The word “the” before the words “offence of” was rep. by the Amending Act, 1891 (12 of 1891), and the words “offence of” were rep. by s. 9 of the Indian Penal Code Amdt. Act, 1882
(8 of 1882).
2
Ins. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 9.
3
Subs. by the Central Laws (Statute Reform) Ordinance, 1960 (21 of 1960), s. 3 and 2nd Sch., (w.e.f. 14th October, 1955), for “the Provinces and the Capital of the Federation” which had
been subs. by A. O., 1949, Arts. 3(2) and 4, for “British India”.
4
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
5
Ins. by the Pakistan Penal Code (Amdt,) Ordinance, 1980 (41 of 1980), s.2.
Explanation.
section.
A dishonest concealment of facts is a deception within the meaning of this
Illustrations
a. A,  by  falsely  pretending  to  be in the Civil Service,  intentionally  deceives Z, and  thus
dishonestly induces Z to let him have on credit goods for which he does not mean, to pay.
A cheats.
b. A, by putting a counterfeit mark on an article, intentionally deceives Z into a belief that this
article was made by a certain celebrated manufacturer, and thus dishonestly induces Z to
buy and pay for the article. A cheats.
c. A, by exhibiting to Z a false sample of an article, intentionally deceives Z into believing
that the article corresponds with the sample, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to buy  and
pay for the article. A cheats.
d. A, by tendering in payment for an article a bill on a house with which A keeps no money,
and  by  which  A  expects  that  the bill will be  dishonoured,  intentionally  deceives Z, and
thereby dishonestly induces Z to deliver the article, intending not to pay for it. A cheats.
e. A,  by  pleading  as  diamonds  articles,  which  he  knows  are  not  diamonds  intentionally
deceives Z, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to lend money. A cheats.
f. A, intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to repay any money that Z may lend
to him and thereby dishonestly induces Z to lend him money, A not intending to repay it.
A cheats.
g. A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to deliver to Z a certain quantity of
indigo plant  which  he  does  not  intend  to deliver, and  thereby  dishonestly  induces  Z  to
advance money upon the faith of such delivery. A cheats ; but if A, at the time of obtaining
the money, intends to deliver the indigo plant, and afterwards breaks his contract and does
not deliver it, he does not cheat, but is liable only to a civil action for breach of contract.
h. A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A has performed A’s part of a contract made
with Z, which he has not performed, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to pay money. A
cheats.
i. A sells and conveys an estate to B. A, knowing that in consequence of such sale he has no
right to the property, sells or mortgages the same to Z, without disclosing the fact of the
previous sale and conveyance to B, and receives the purchase or mortgage money from Z.
A cheats.
416. Cheating  by  personation. A  person is said to “cheat by  personation” if he  cheats  by
pretending  to  be some other  person,  or  by knowingly substituting  one  person  for  another,  or
representing that he or any other person is a person other than he or such other person really is.
Explanation.
person.
The offence is committed whether the individual personated is a real or imaginary
Illustrations
a. A  cheats  by  pretending  to  be  a  certain  rich  banker  of  the same name.  A  cheats  by
personation.
b. A cheats by pretending to be B, a person who is deceased. A cheats by personation.
417. Punishment  for  cheating. Whoever  cheats  shall  be  punished with  imprisonment of  either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.