[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 195: Giving  or  fabricating  false  evidence  with  intent  to  procure  conviction  of  offence

punishable with. Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be
likely that he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an offence which
l
[by any law for the time being
in force] is not capital, but punishable with
2
[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment for a term of seven years
or upwards, shall be punished as a person convicted of that offence would be liable to be punished.
Illustration
3
[Imprisonment for life or for a term of seven years or upwards]. A gives false evidence before a Court
of  Justice,  intending  thereby  to  cause  Z  to  be  convicted  of  a  dacoity.  The  punishment  of  dacoity  is
2
[imprisonment for life], or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, with or without
fine. A, therefore, is liable to
4
[such imprisonment for life] or imprisonment, with or without fine.
196. Using evidence known to be false. Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use as true or genuine
evidence any evidence which he knows to be false or fabricated, shall be punished in the same manner as if he
gave or fabricated false evidence.
197. Issuing or signing false certificate. Whoever issues or signs any certificate required by law to be
given or signed, or relating to any fact of which such certificate is by law admissible in evidence, knowing or
believing that such certificate is false in any material point, shall be punished in the same manner as if he gave
false evidence.
198. Using as true a certificate known to be false. Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use any such
certificate as a true certificate, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall be punished in the same
manner as if he gave false evidence.
1
The original words, "by this Code" have successively been amended by Act 27 of 1870, s. 7, Act 9 of 1890, s. 149, and A. 0., 1949, Sch., to read as
above.
2
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
3
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance. 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2. and Sch., or "transportation or imprisonment",
4
Subs. ibid.. for "such transportation".
199. False statement made in declaration which is by law receivable as evidence. Whoever in
any  declaration  made  or  subscribed  by him, which  declaration  any  Court  of  Justice,  or  any public
servant or other person, is bound or authorized by law to receive as evidence of any fact, makes any
statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be
true,  touching  any  point  material  to  the  object  for  which  the  declaration is made  or  used,  shall  be
punished in the same manner as if he gave false evidence.
200. Using as true such declaration knowing it to be false. Whoever corruptly uses or attempts
to use as true any such declaration, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall be punished
in the same manner as if he gave false evidence.
Explanation. A declaration which is inadmissible merely upon the ground of some informality,
is a declaration within the meaning of sections 199 and 200.