[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 485: Making  or  possession  of  any  instrument  for  counterfeiting  a  trade  mark  or  property

mark. Whoever makes or has in his possession any die, plate or other instrument for the purpose of
counterfeiting a trade mark or property mark, or has in his possession a trade mark or property mark
for  the  purpose  of  denoting  that  any goods are  the  manufacture  or  merchandise  of  a  person  whose
manufacture or merchandise they are not, or that they belong to a person to whom they do not  belong,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both.
486. Selling goods marked with a counterfeit trade mark or property mark. Whoever sells, or
exposes, or has in possession for sale or any purpose of trade or manufacture, any goods or thing with
a counterfeit trade mark or property mark affixed to or impressed upon the same or to or upon any case,
package or other receptacle in which such goods are contained, shall, unless he proves-
(a) that,  having  taken  all  reasonable  precautions against  committing an  offence against this
section, he had at the time of the commission of the alleged offence no reason to suspect the
genuineness of the mark, and
(b) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the information in his
power with respect to the persons from whom he obtained such goods or things, or
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently,
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine, or with both.
487. Making  a  false  mark  upon  any  receptacle  containing  goods. Whoever  makes  any  false
mark upon any case, package or other receptacle containing goods, in a manner reasonably calculated
to cause any public servant or any other person to believe that such receptacle contains goods which  it
does not contain or that it does not contain goods which it does contain, or that the goods contained in
such receptacle are of a nature or quality different from the real nature or quality thereof, shall, unless
he proves that he acted without intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
488. Punishment for making use of any such false mark. Whoever makes use of any such false
mark in any manner prohibited by the last foregoing section shall, unless he proves that he acted without
intent to defraud, be punished as if he had committed an offence against that section.
489. Tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury. Whoever removes, destroys,
defaces or adds to any property mark, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause
injury to any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.]
Of Currency-Notes and Bank-Notes
1
[489A.Counterfeiting  currency-notes  or  bank-notes. Whoever  counterfeits,  or knowingly
performs any part of the process of
2
counterfeiting, any currency-note or banknote, shall be punished
with
3
[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation. For the purposes of this section and of sections 489B, 489C and 489D, the
expression “bank­note” means a promissory note or engagement for the payment of money to bearer
on demand issued by any person carrying on the business of banking in any part of the world, or issued
by or under the authority of any State or Sovereign Power, and intended to be used as equivalent to, or
as a substitute for, money.
489B. Using as genuine forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-notes. Whoever sells to,
or buys or receives from, any other person, or otherwise traffics in or uses as genuine, any forged or
counterfeit currency-note or bank-note, knowing or having reason to believe the same to be forged or
counterfeit,  shall  be  punished   with
3
[imprisonment   for   life],   or   with   imprisonment   of  either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
489C. Possession of forged or counterfeit  currency-notes or bank-notes. Whoever has in his
possession any
4
forged or counterfeit currency-note or bank-note, knowing or having reason to believe
the same to be forged or counterfeit and intending to use the same as genuine or that it may  be used as
genuine,  shall  be  punished with  imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to
seven years, or with fine, or with both.