[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 338G: Rules

3
[(1)] The Government may, in consultation with the Council of Islamic Ideology,
by notification in the official Gazette, make such rules as it may consider necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Chapter.
3
[(2)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sub-section  (1),  the  Federal  Government  may,  by
Notification in the official Gazette, make rules regarding the following matters, namely:
(a) providing  mechanism  for  creation  of  a  fund,  which  shall  be  non-lapsable  and  exempted
from taxes, for the purpose of making of payment of diyat, arsh and daman of the convicts,
who, on account of  poverty and weak financial position are confined in jails for want of
making the said payment;
(b) facility of extending soft loans out of the said fund to the convicts enabling them to satisfy
the claim of legal heirs of the deceased or victims in respect of diyat, arsh and daman;
(c) in appropriate cases release of such prisoners on parole by the court who after having served
out  the  substantive  sentence  of imprisonment, if  any, are  confined in jails on  account  of
non-payment of diyat, arsh and daman;
(d) providing  jobs  to  the said convicts,  other  than  the  Government  department in the  work
places attached with the jails or through the social organizations or philanthropists, enabling
the convicts to disburse the amount paid out of the fund or extended through loans;
1
Subs & ins by Act I of 05, s.12.
2
Subs. by Act XLIII of 2016, s. 7.
3
Re-numbered & added by Act XV of 2010, s.5 (w.e.f. 3-10-2007)
(e) mechanism for protecting rights of the victims for the purpose of diyat, arsh and daman;
and
(f) any other matter for which the rules may be necessary to carry out the aforesaid purpose.]
338H. Saving. (1) Nothing in this Chapter, except sections 309, 310 and 338E, shall apply to
cases pending before any court immediately before the commencement of the Criminal Law (Second
Amendment)   Ordinance,   1990 (VII of   1990),   or   to   the   offences   committed   before   such
commencement.
1
[CHAPTER XVI-A]
OF WRONGFUL RESTRAINT AND WRONGFUL CONFINEMENT
339. Wrongful restraint. Whoever voluntarily obstructs any person so as to prevent that person
from  proceeding in any  direction in which  that  person  has  a right to  proceed, is said wrongfully to
restrain that person.
Exception. The obstruction of a private way over land or water which a person in good faith
believes himself to have a lawful right to obstruct, is not an offence within the meaning of this section.
Illustration
A obstructs a path along which Z has a right to pass, A not believing in good faith that he has a right
to stop the path. Z is thereby prevented from passing. A wrongfully restrains Z.
340. Wrongful  confinement. Whoever wrongfully restrains  any  person in such  a  manner  as  to
prevent  that  person  from  proceeding  beyond  certain  circumscribing limits, is said “wrongfully to
confine” that person.
Illustrations
(a) A causes Z to go within a walled space, and locks Z in. Z is than prevented from proceeding
in any direction beyond the circumscribing line of wall. A wrongly confines Z.
1
Ins by Act No II of 1997, s.7.
(b) A places man with firearms at the outlets of a building, and tells Z that they will fire at Z if
Z attempts to leave the building. A wrongfully confines Z.
341. Punishment  wrongful  restrains.  Whoever wrongfully  restrains any  person,  shall  be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to
1
[one thousand] five hundred rupees, or with both.
342. Punishment for wrongful confinement. Whoever wrongfully confines any person, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine
which may extend to
1
[three] thousand rupees, or with both.
343. Wrongful confinement for three or more days. Whoever wrongfully confines any person
for three days or more, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
344. Wrongful confinement for ten or more days. Whoever wrongfully confines any person for
ten  days,  or  more,  shall  be  punished with  imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
345. Wrongful  confinement  of  person  for  whose  liberation  writ  has  been  issued. Whoever
keeps any person in wrongful confinement, knowing that a writ for the liberation of that  person has
been  duly  issued,  shall  be  punished with  imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may
extend to two years in addition to any term of imprisonment to which he may be liable under any other
section of this Chapter.
346. Wrongful confinement in secret. Whoever wrongfully confines any person in such manner
as  to  indicate  an  intention  that  the  confinement  of  such  person  may  not  be  known  to  any  person
interested in the person so confined, or to any public servant, or that the place of such confinement may
not be known to or discovered by any such person or public servant as hereinbefore mentioned, shall
be  punished with  imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  two  years in
addition to any other punishment to which he may be liable for such wrongful confinement.
347. Wrongful confinement to extort property or constrain to illegal act. Whoever wrongfully
confines  any  person  for  the  purpose  of  extorting  from  the  person  confined,  or  from  any  person
interested in the  person  confined,  any  property  or  valuable  security  or  of  constraining  the  person
confined or any person interested in such person to do anything illegal or to give any information which
may facilitate the commission of an offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
348. Wrongful confinement to extort confession, or compel restoration of property. Whoever
wrongfully confines any person for the purpose of extorting from the person confined or any person
interested in the person confined any confession or any information which may lead to the detection of
an  offence  or  misconduct,  or  for  the  purpose  of  constraining  the  person  confined  or  any  person
interested in the person confined to restore or to cause the restoration
1
Subs. by ord. 86 of 02, s.2 & Sch.I.
of any property or valuable security or to satisfy any claim or demand, or to give information which
may lead to the restoration of any property or valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
1
Of Criminal Force and Assault
349. Force. A  person is said to  use  force  to  another if he  causes  motion,  change  of  motion,  or
cessation of motion to that other, or if he causes to any substance such motion, or change of motion, or
cessation  of motion as brings that  substance  into  contact with any  part  of  that  other's body, or with
anything which that other is wearing or carrying, or with anything so situated that such contact affects
that  other's  sense  of  feeling  :  Provided  that  the  person  causing  the  motion,  or  change  of  motion,  or
cessation of motion, causes that motion, change of motion, or cessation of motion in one of the three
ways hereinafter described :
First. By his own bodily power.
Secondly. By disposing any substance in such a manner that the motion or change or cessation
of motion takes place without any further act on his part, or on the part of any other person.
Thirdly. By inducing any animal to move, to change its motion, or to cease to move.
350. Criminal  force. Whoever  intentionally  uses  force  to  any  person,  without  that  person's
consent, in order to the committing of any offence, or intending by the use of such force to cause, or
knowing it to be likely that by the use of such force he will cause injury, fear or annoyance to the person
to whom the force is used, is said to use criminal force to that other.
Illustrations
(a) Z is sitting in a  moored boat  on a river. A unfastens the moorings, and thus intentionally
causes the boat to drift down the stream. Here A intentionally causes motion to Z, and he
does this by disposing substances in such a manner that the motion is produced without any
other action on any person’s part. A has therefore intentionally used force to Z; and if he
has done so without Z’s consent, in order to the committing of any offence, or intending or
knowing it to be likely that this use of force will cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, A has
used criminal force to Z.
(b) Z is riding in a chariot. A lashes Z’s horses, and thereby causes them to quicken their pace.
Here A has caused change of motion to Z by inducing the animals to change their motion.
A has therefore used force to Z; and if A has done this without Z’s consent, intending or
knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, frighten or annoy Z, A has used criminal
force to Z.
(c) Z is riding in a palanquin. A, intending to rob Z, seizes the pole and stops the palanquin.
Here A has caused cessation of motion to Z, and he has done this by his own bodily power.
A has therefore used force to Z; and as A has acted thus intentionally, without Z’s consent,
in order to the commission of an offence. A has used criminal force to Z.
l
As to punishment for an offence under s. 354 enquired into by a Council of Elders in a Punjab Frontier District, in the N.W.F.P. or in Baluchistan
see the Frontier Crime Regulation, 1901 (3 of 1901), s.12.
(d) A intentionally pushes against Z in the street. Here A has by his own bodily power moved
his own  person  so  as  to  bring it into  contact with Z. He  has  therefore  intentionally  used
force to Z; and if he has done so without Z’s consent, intending or knowing it to be likely
that he may thereby injure, frighten or annoy Z, he has used criminal force to Z.
(e) A throws a stone, intending or knowing it to be likely that the stone will be thus brought
into contact with Z, or with Z’s clothes, or with something carried by Z, or that it will strike
water,  and  dash  up  the  water against Z’s clothes  or  something  carried  by Z. Here, if the
throwing of the stone produce the effect of causing any substance to come into contact with
Z, or Z’s clothes,  A  has  used  force  to Z; and if he did so  without Z’s consent,  intending
thereby to injure, frighten or annoy Z, he has used criminal force to Z.
(f) A intentionally pulls up a woman's veil. Here  A intentionally uses force to  her, and if he
does so without her consent intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure,
frighten or annoy her, he has used criminal force to her.
(g) Z is bathing, A pours into the bath water which he knows to be boiling. Here A intentionally
by his own bodily power causes such motion in the boiling water as brings that water into
contact with Z, or with other water so situated that such contact must affect Z’s sense of
feeling: A has therefore intentionally used force to Z; and if he has done this without Z’s
consent  intending  or  knowing it to  be likely that  he  may  thereby  cause injury, fear  or
annoyance to Z. A has used criminal force.
(h) A incites a dog to spring upon Z, without Z’s consent. Here, if A intends to cause injury,
fear or annoyance to Z, he uses criminal force to Z.
351. Assault. Whoever makes any gesture, or any preparation intending or knowing it to be likely
that  such  gesture  or  preparation will cause  any  person  present  to  apprehend  that  he  who  makes  that
gesture or preparation is about to use criminal force to that person, is said to commit an assault.
Explanation. Mere words do not amount to an assault. But the words which a person uses may
give to his gestures or preparation such a meaning as may make those gestures or preparations amount
to an assault.
Illustrations
(a) A shakes his fist at Z, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause Z to
believe that A is about to strike Z. A has committed an assault.
(b) A begins to unloose the muzzle of a ferocious dog, intending, or knowing it to be likely that
he  may  thereby  cause  Z  to  believe  that  he is about  to  cause  the  dog  to attack Z. A  has
committed an assault upon Z.
(c) A takes up a stick, saying to Z, “I wi1l give you a beating”. Here, though the words used by
A could in no case amount to an assault, and though the mere gesture, unaccompanied by
any other circumstances, might not amount to an assault, the gesture explained by the words
may amount to an assault.
.
352. Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on grave provocation. Whoever
assaults  or  uses criminal force  to any person otherwise  than on grave  and sudden  provocation given by that
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months,
or with fine which may extend to
1
[one thousand five hundred rupees], or with both.
Explanation. –– Grave and sudden provocation will not mitigate the punishment for an offence under this
section, if the provocation is sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender as an excuse for the offence, or
if the provocation is given by anything done in obedience to the law, or by a public servant, in the lawful
exercise of the powers of such public servant, or
if the provocation  is given by anything done in the lawful exercise  of the right of  private  defence.
Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to mitigate the offence, is a question of fact.
353. Assault  or  criminal  force  to  deter  public  servant  from  discharge  of  his  duty. Whoever
assaults or uses criminal force to any person being a public servant in the execution of his duty as such public
servant,  or with intent to  prevent  or  deter that person  from discharging his duty  as  such  public  servant,  or  in
consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by such person in the lawful discharge of his duty as such
public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description  for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.
354. Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty. Whoever assaults or
uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her
modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both.
2
[354A. Assault or use of criminal force to woman and stripping her of her clothes. Whoever
assaults or uses criminal force to any women and strips her of her clothes and, in that condition, exposes her to
the public view, shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.]