[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://na.gov.pk/uploads/documents/6926e060076ed_467.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

Constitution Section 266: The Interim Constitution of the Islamic Republic of

Pakistan, together with the Acts and President’s Orders making
omissions from, additions to, modifications of, or amendments
in, that Constitution is hereby repealed.
C
HAPTER7.–TRANSITIONAL
267. (1) At any time before the commencing day or before the
expiration of three months from the commencing day, the
President may, for the purpose of removing any difficulties, or for
bringing the provisions of the Constitution into effective
operation, by Order, direct that the provisions of the Constitution
shall, during such period as may be specified in the Order, have
effect,   subject   to   such   adaptations,   whether   by   way   of
modification, addition or omission, as he may deem to be
necessary or expedient.
(2)    An Order made under clause (1) shall be laid before
both Houses without undue delay, and shall remain in force until
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN                      169
Repeal.
Power of
President to
remove diffi-
culties.
a resolution disapproving it is passed by each House or, in case
of disagreement between the two Houses, until such resolution is
passed at a joint sitting.
1
[267A.   If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of   the   Constitution   (Eighteenth   Amendment)   Act,   2010,
hereinafter in this Article referred to as the Act, or for bringing
the provisions of the Act into effective operation, the matter shall
be laid before both Houses in a joint sitting which may by a
resolution direct that the provisions of the Act shall, during such
period as may be specified in the resolution, have effect, subject
to such adaptations, whether by way of modification, addition or
omission, as may be deemed necessary or expedient:
Provided that this power shall be available for a period of
one year from the commencement of the Act.
267B.For removal of doubt it is hereby declared that Article
152A omitted and Articles 179 and 195 substituted by the
Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 2003 (Act No. III of
2003), notwithstanding its repeal, shall be deemed always to have
been so omitted and substituted.]
268. (1) Except as provided by this Article, all existing laws
shall, subject to the Constitution, continue in force, so far as
applicable and with the necessary adaptations, until altered,
repealed or amended by the appropriate Legislature.
2
*       *       *       *       *       *       *
(3)    For the purpose of bringing the provisions of any
existing law into accord with the provisions of the Constitution
(other than Part II of the Constitution), the President may by
Order, within a period of two years from the commencing day,
make such adaptations, whether by way of modification, addition
or omission, as he may deem to be necessary or expedient, and
any such Order may be made so as to have effect from such day,
not being a day earlier than the commencing day, as may be
specified in the Order.
(4)    The President may
3
authorize the Governor of a
Province to exercise, in relation to the Province, the powers
conferred on the President by clause (3) in respect of laws
relating to matters with respect to which the Provincial Assembly
has power to make laws.
170                       CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
1
New Articles 267A and 267B ins. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010
(10 of 2010), s. 93.
2
Clause (2) omitted ibid.,s. 94.
3
For such authorization, seeGaz. of Pak., 1973, Ext., Pt. II, p. 2001.
Continuance in
force, and
adaptation of
certain laws.
Power to
remove diffi-
culties.
Removal of
doubt.
(5)    The powers exercisable under clauses (3) and (4) shall
be subject to the provisions of an Act of the appropriate
Legislature.
(6)    Any   court,   tribunal   or   authority   required   or
empowered to enforce an existing law shall, notwithstanding that
no adaptations have been made in such law by an Order made
under clause (3) or clause (4), construe the law with all such
adaptations as are necessary to bring it into accord with the
provisions of the Constitution.
(7)    In this Article, “existing laws” means all laws
(including   Ordinances,   Orders-in-Council,   Orders,   rules,
bye-laws, regulations and Letters Patent constituting a High
Court, and any notifications and other legal instruments having
the force of law) in force in Pakistan or any part thereof, or having
extra-territorialvalidity, immediately before the commencing day.
Explanation.–In this Article, “in force”, in relation to any
law, means having effect as law whether or not the law has been
brought into operation.
269. (1)  All Proclamations, President’s Orders, Martial Law
Regulations, Martial Law Orders and all other laws made
between the twentieth day of December, one thousand nine
hundred and seventy-one and the twentieth day of April, one
thousand nine hundred and seventy-two (both days inclusive), are
hereby declared notwithstanding any judgment of any court, to
have been validly made by competent authority and shall not be
called in question in any court on any ground whatsoever.
(2)    All orders made, proceedings taken and acts done by
any authority, or by any person, which were made, taken or done,
or purported to have been made, taken or done, between the
twentieth day of December, one thousand nine hundred and
seventy-one, and the twentieth day of April, one thousand nine
hundred and seventy-two (both days inclusive), in exercise of the
powers derived from any President’s Orders, Martial Law
Regulations, Martial Law Orders, enactments, notifications,
rules, orders or bye-laws, or in execution of any orders made or
sentences passed by any authority in the exercise or purported
exercise of powers as aforesaid, shall, notwithstanding any
judgment of any court, be deemed to be and always to have been
validly made, taken or done and shall not be called in question in
any court on any ground whatsoever.
(3)    No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie in any court
against any authority or any person for or on account of or in
respect of any order made, proceedings taken or act done whether
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN                      171
Validation of
laws, acts, etc.
in the exercise or purported exercise of the powers referred to in
clause (2) or in execution of or in compliance with orders made
or sentences passed in exercise or purported exercise of such
powers.
270. (1)
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] may by law made in
the manner prescribed for legislation for a matter in Part I of the
Federal Legislative List validate all Proclamations, President’s
Orders, Martial Law Regulations, Martial Law Orders and other
laws made between the twenty-fifth day of March, one thousand
nine   hundred   and   sixty-nine,   and   the   nineteenth   day   of
December, one thousand nine hundred and seventy-one (both
days inclusive).
(2)    Notwithstanding a judgment of any court, a law made
by
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] under clause (1) shall not be
questioned in any court on any ground, whatsoever.
(3)    Notwithstanding the provisions of clause (1), and a
judgment of any court to the contrary, for a period of two years
from the commencing day, the validity of all such instruments as
are referred to in clause (1) shall not be called in question before
any court on any ground whatsoever.
(4)    All orders, made, proceedings taken, and acts done by
any authority, or any person, which were made, taken or done, or
purported to have been made, taken or done, between the
twenty-fifth day of March, one thousand nine hundred and
sixty-nine and nineteenth day of December, one thousand nine
hundred and seventy-one (both days inclusive), in exercise of
powers derived from any President’s Orders, Martial Law
Regulations, Martial Law Orders, enactments, notifications,
rules, orders or bye-laws, or in execution of any order made or
sentence passed by any authority in the exercise or purported
exercise of power as aforesaid shall, notwithstanding any
judgement of any court, be deemed to be and always to have been
validly made, taken or done, so however that any such order,
proceeding or act may be declared invalid by
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora
(Parliament)] at any time within a period of two years from the
commencing day byresolution of both Houses, or in case of
disagreement between the two Houses, by such resolution passed
at a joint sitting and shall not be called in question before any
court on any ground, whatsoever.
2
[
3
[270A.–(1)  The Proclamation of the fifth day of July, 1977, all
President’s Orders, Ordinances, Martial Law Regulations,
172                       CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
1
Seefootnote 9 on page 5, supra.
2
Articles 270A and 270B ins. by P. O. No. 14 of 1985, Art. 2 and Sch.
3
Article 270A subs. by the Constitution (Eighth Amdt.) Act, 1985 (18 of 1985) s. 19,
for ‘‘Art. 270A’’ (w.e.f.30-12-1985) videS.R.O. No. 1279(1)/85, dated 29-12-85 read
with Proclamation of withdrawal of Martial Law, dated 30-12-85, seeGaz. of Pak., 1985,
Ext., Pt. 1. Pp. 431-432.
Temporary val-
idation of cer-
tain laws, etc.
Affirmation of
President’s
Orders, etc.
Martial Law Orders, including the Referendum Order, 1984 (P.O.
No. 11 of 1984),
1
*   *   * the Revival of the Constitution of 1973
Order, 1985 (P.O. No. 14 of 1985), the Constitution (Second
Amendment) Order, 1985 (P.O. No. 20 of 1985), the Constitution
(Third Amendment) Order, 1985 (P.O. No. 24 of 1985), and all
other laws made between the fifth day of July, 1977, and the
date* on which this Article comes into force are hereby affirmed,
adopted and declared, notwithstanding any judgement of any
court, to have been validly made by competent authority and,
notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, shall not
be called in question in any court on any ground whatsoever :
Provided that a President’s Order, Martial Law Regulation
or Martial Law Order made after the thirtieth day of September,
1985, shall be confined only to making such provisions as
facilitate, or are incidental to, the revocation of the Proclamation
of the fifth day of July, 1977.
(2)    All orders made, proceedings taken and acts done by
any authority or by any person, which were made, taken or done,
or purported to have been made, taken or done, between the fifth
day of July, 1977, and the date on which this Article comes into
force, in exercise of the powers derived from any Proclamation,
President’s Orders, Ordinances, Martial Law Regulations,
Martial Law Orders, enactments, notifications, rules, orders or
bye-laws, or in execution of or in compliance with any order
made or sentence passed by any authority in the exercise or
purported exercise of powers as aforesaid, shall, notwithstanding
any judgement of any court, be deemed to be and always to have
been validly made, taken or done and shall not be called in
question in any court on any ground whatsoever.
(3)    All President’s Orders, Ordinances, Martial Law
Regulations, Martial Law Orders, enactments, notifications,
rules, orders, or bye-laws, in force immediately before the date*
on which this Article comes into force shall continue in force
until altered, repealed or amended by competent authority.
Explanation.–In   this   clause,   ‘‘competent   authority’’
means,––
(a)    in respect of President’s Orders, Ordinances, Martial
Law   Regulations,   Martial   Law   Orders   and
enactments, the appropriate Legislature; and
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN                      173
1
Certain words omitted by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of
2010), s. 95.
*Article 270A subs. by the Constitution (Eighth Amdt.) Act, 1985 (18 of 1985), which
received Presidet’s assent on 09-11-1985, came into forece on 09-11-1985.
(b)    in respect of notifications, rules, orders and bye-laws,
the authority in which the power to make, alter, repeal
or amend the same vests under the law.
(4)    No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall
lie in any court against any authority or any person, for or on
account of or in respect of any order made, proceedings taken or
act done whether in the exercise or purported exercise of the
powers referred to in clause (2) or in execution of or in
compliance with orders made or sentences passed in exercise or
purported exercise of such powers.
(5)    For the purposes of clauses (1), (2) and (4), all orders
made, proceedings taken, acts done or purporting to be made,
taken or done by any authority or person shall be deemed to have
been made, taken or done in good faith and for the purpose
intended to be served thereby.
1
[(6) The laws referred to in clause (1) may be amended by
the   appropriate   Legislature   in   the   manner   provided   for
amendment of such laws].]
2
[270AA. (1) The Proclamation of Emergency of the fourteenth
day of October, 1999, the Provisional Constitution Order No. 1 of
1999, the Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2000 (No. 1 of 2000),
Chief Executive’s Order No. 12 of 2002, Chief Executive’s Order
No. 19 of 2002, the amendments made in the Constitution
through the Legal Framework Order, 2002 (Chief Executive’s
Order No. 24 of 2002), the Legal Framework (Amendment) Order,
2002 (Chief Executive’s Order No. 29 of 2002) and the Legal
Framework   (Second   Amendment)   Order,   2002   (Chief
Executive’s   Order   No.   32   of   2002)   notwithstanding   any
judgment of any court including the Supreme Court or a High
Court, are hereby declared as having been made without lawful
authority and of no legal effect.
(2)    Except as provided in clause (1) and subject to the
provisions of the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act,
2010, all laws including President’s Orders, Acts, Ordinances,
Chief Executive’s Orders, regulations, enactments, notifications,
rules, orders or bye-laws made between the twelfth day of
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 95, for “clause (6)”.
2
Subs. ibid., for “Article 270AA” s. 96.
174                       CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
Declaration
and continu-
ance of laws
etc.
October, one thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine and the
thirty-first day of December, two thousand and three (both days
inclusive) and still in force shall, continue to be in force until
altered, repealed or amended by the competent authority.
Explanation.–For the purposes of clause (2) and clause (6),
“competent authority” means,–
(a)     in respect of Presidents’ Orders, Ordinances, Chief
Executive’s Orders and all other laws, the appropriate
Legislature; and
(b)    in respect of notifications, rules, orders and bye-laws,
the authority in which the power to make, alter, repeal
or amend the same vests under the law.
(3)    Notwithstanding   anything   contained   in   the
Constitution or clause (1), or judgment of any court including the
Supreme Court or a High Court,––
(a)    Judges of the Supreme Court, High Courts and
Federal Shariat Court who were holding the office of
a Judge or were appointed as such, and had taken oath
under the Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2000 (1 of
2000), shall be deemed to have continued to hold the
office as a Judge or to have been appointed as such, as
the case may be, under the Constitution, and such
continuance   or   appointment,   shall   have   effect
accordingly.
(b)    Judges of the Supreme Court, High Courts and
Federal Shariat Court who not having been given or
taken oath under the Oath of Office (Judges) Order,
2000 (1 of 2000), and ceased to hold the office of a
Judge shall, for the purposes of pensionary benefits
only, be deemed to have continued to hold office under
the Constitution till their date of superannuation.
(4)    All orders made, proceedings taken, appointments
made, including secondments and deputations, and acts done by
any authority, or by any person, which were made, taken or done,
or purported to have been made, taken or done, between the
twelfth   day   of   October,   one   thousand   nine   hundred   and
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN                      175
ninety-nine, and the thirty first day of December, two thousand
and three (both days inclusive), in exercise of the powers derived
from any authority or laws mentioned in clause (2), or in
execution of or in complaince with any orders made or sentences
passed by any authority in the exercise or purported exercise of
powers as aforesaid, shall, notwithstanding anything contained in
clause (1), be deemed to be valid and shall not be called in
question in any court or forum on any ground whatsoever.
(5)    No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings,
including writ petitions, shall lie in any court or forum against
any authority or any person, for or on account of or in respect of
any order made, proceedings taken or act done whether in the
exercise or purported exercise of the powers referred to in clause
(2) or clause (4) or in execution of or in compliance with orders
made or sentences passed in exercise or purported exercise of
such powers.
(6)    Notwithstanding   omission   of   the   Concurrent
Legislative List by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment)
Act, 2010, all laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated
in the said List (including Ordinances, Orders, rules, bye-laws,
regulations and notifications and other legal instruments having
the force of law) in force in Pakistan or any part thereof, or
having   extra-territorial   operation,   immediately   before   the
commencement of the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment)
Act, 2010, shall continue to remain in force until altered, repealed
or amended by the competent authority.
(7)    Nothwithstanding   anything   contained   in   the
Constitution, all taxes and fees levied under any law in force
immediately before the commencement of the Constitution
(Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010, shall continue to be levied
until they are varied or abolished by an Act of the appropriate
legislature.
(8)    On the omission of the Concurrent Legislative List,
the process of devolution of the matters mentioned in the said
List to the Provinces shall be completed by the thirtieth day of
June, two thousand and eleven.
(9)    For purposes of the devolution process under clause
(8), the Federal Government shall constitute an Implementation
Commission as it may deem fit within fifteen days of the
commencement of the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment)
Act, 2010.]
176                       CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
1
[270AAA.  Validation and affirmation of laws etc.]