[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 439: Punishment for intentionally running vessel a ground or ashore with intent to commit

theft, etc. Whoever intentionally runs any vessel a ground or ashore, intending to commit theft of any
property contained therein or to dishonestly misappropriate any such property, or with intent that such
theft or misappropriation of property may be committed, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
440. Mischief  committed  after  preparation  made  causing  death  or  hurt. Whoever commits
mischief, having made preparation for causing to any person death, or hurt, or wrongful restraint, or
fear  of  death,  or  of  hurt,  or  of  wrongful  restraint,  shall  be  punished with  imprisonment of  either
description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Of Criminal Trespass
441. Criminal trespass. Whoever enters into or upon property in the possession of another with
intent to commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession of such property,
or, having lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully remains therewith intent thereby
to intimidate, insult or annoy any such person, or with intent to commit an offence, is said to commit
“criminal trespass”.
442. House-trespass. Whoever commits  criminal trespass  by  entering  into  or  remaining in any
building, tent or vessel used as a human dwelling or any building used as a place for worship, or as a
place for the custody of property, is said to commit “house­trespass”.
Explanation. The introduction of any part of the criminal trespasser’s body is entering sufficient
to constitute house-trespass.
443. Lurking  house-trespass. Whoever commits house-trespass  having  taken  precautions  to
conceal such house-trespass from some person who has a right to exclude or eject the trespasser from
the building, tent  or  vessel  which is the  subject  of  the  trespass, is said to commit “lurking house­
trespass”.
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
444. Lurking house-trespass by night. Whoever commits lurking house-trespass after sunset
and before sunrise, is said to commit “lurking house­trespass by night”.
445. House-breaking. A person is said to commit “house­breaking” who commits house-trespass
if he effects his entrance into the house or any part of it in any of the six ways hereinafter described; or
if, being in the house or any part of it for the purpose of committing an offence, or, having committed
an offence threin, he quits the house or any part of it in any of such six ways, that is to
say:
Firstly. If he enters or quits through a passage made by himself, or by any abettor of the house-
trespass, in order to the committing of the house-trespass.
Secondly. If he enters or quits through any passage not intended by any person, other than
himself or an abettor of the offence, for human entrance ; or through any passage to which he has
obtained access by scaling or climbing over any wall or building.
Thirdly. If he enters or quits through any passage which he or any abettor of the house-trespass
has opened, in order to the committing of the house-trespass by any means by which that passage was
not intended by the occupier of the house to be opened.
Fourthly. If he enters or quits by opening any lock in order to the committing of the house-
trespass, or in order to the quitting of the house after a house-trespass.
Fifthly. If he effects his entrance or departure by using criminal force or committing an assault,
or by threatening any person with assault.
Sixthly. If he enters or quits by any passage which he knows to have been fastened against such
entrance or departure, and to have been unfastened by himself or by an abettor of the house trespass.
Explanation. Any out-house or building occupied with a house, and between which and such
house  there  is  an  immediate  internal  communication,  is  part  of  the  house  within  the  meaning  of  this
section.
Illustrations
a. A commits house-trespass by making a hole through the wall of Z’s house, and putting his
hand through the apperture. This is house-breaking.
b. A commits house-trespass  by  creeping  into  a ship at  a  port-hole  between  decks. This  is
house-breaking.
c. A commits house-trespass  by  entering Z’s house,  through  a window. This  is house-
breaking.
d. A commits house-trespass by entering Z’s house through the door, having opened a door
which was fastened. This is house-breaking.
e. A commits house-trespass by entering Z’s house through the door having lifted a latch by
putting a wire through a hole in the door. This is house-breaking.
f. A finds the key of Z’s house door, which Z had lost, and commits house-trespass by entering
Z’s house, having opened the door with that key.This is house-breaking.
g. Z is standing in his doorway. A forces a passage by knocking Z down, and commits house-
trespass by entering the house. This is house-breaking.
h. Z, the door-keeper of Y, is standing in Y’s doorway. A commits house-trespass by entering
the house, having deterred Z from opposing him by threatening to beat him. This is house-
breaking.
446. House-breaking  by  night. Whoever commits house-breaking  after  sunset  and  before
sunrise, is said to commit “house­breaking by night”.
447. Punishment  for  criminal  trespass. Whoever commits  criminal trespass  shall  be  punished
with  imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  three  months,  or with fine
which may extend to
1
[one thousand five hundred rupees], or with both.
448. Punishment  for  house-trespass. Whoever commits house-trespass  shall  be  punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may
extend to
1
[three thousand rupees], or with both.
449. House  trespass  in  order  to  commit  offence  punishable  with  death. Whoever commits
house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence punishable with death, shall be punished with
2
[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.