[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://na.gov.pk/uploads/documents/6926e060076ed_467.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

Constitution Section 175D: Before entering upon office, the Chief Justice of the

Federal Constitutional Court shall make before the President, and
any other Judge of the Federal Constitutional Court shall make
before the Chief Justice, oath in the form set out in the Third
Schedule.
175E.        (1) The Federal Constitutional Court shall, to the
exclusion of every other court, have original jurisdiction in any
dispute between any two or more Governments.
Appointment
of Federal
Constitutional
Court Judges.
Oath of Office
of the Chief
Justice and
other judges
of the Federal
Constitutional
Court.
Original
jurisdiction of
Federal
Constitutional
Court.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN99
Explanation.—In  this clause, “Governments” means the
Federal Government and the Provincial Governments.
(2)    In the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred on it by
clause (1), the Federal Constitutional Court shall pronounce
declaratory judgments only.
(3)    Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 199, the
Federal Constitutional Court shall, if it considers that a question
of public importance with reference to the enforcement of any of
the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II is
involved, have the power to make an order of the nature
mentioned in the said Article:
Provided that, subject to the satisfaction of the Federal
Constitutional Court, the jurisdiction under this clause shall only
be exercised if an application is filed by a person in that Court.
(4)    All petitions which fall under this Article and appeals
or review applications against judgments rendered or orders
passed under this Article, pending or filed before the Supreme
Court or its Constitutional Benches, prior to commencement of
the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2025, shall
forthwith stand transferred to the Federal Constitutional Court
and shall only be heard and decided by the Federal Constitutional
Court.
(5)    The Federal Constitutional Court may, on its own
motion or otherwise, if it considers that the case involves a
substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the
Constitution, call for the record of any case pending before any
court and make such order in the case as it thinks fit.
175F.       (1) The Federal Constitutional Court shall have
jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals from judgments,
decrees, final orders or sentences of a High Court as provided
herein below —
(a)  where an Act of Majlis-e-Shoora(Parliament) so
provides;
(b) if the High Court certifies that the case involves a
substantial question of law as to the interpretation of
the Constitution; or
(c) from a judgment or an order of a High Court made
under Article 199 only if the Federal Constitutional
Court grants leave to appeal:
Appellate
jurisdiction of
the Federal
Constitutional
Court.
100                       CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
Provided that no appeal shall lie against a judgment
or an order of a High Court made under Article 199, in
a case which relates to rent and family except
guardianship and such other matters as may be deter-
mined by law.
(2)   All petitions for leave to appeal, appeals or review
applications, to which clause (1) apply or any other proceedings
falling within the jurisdiction of the Federal Constitutional Court,
filed   or   pending   before   the   Supreme   Court   prior   to
commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment)
Act, 2025, stand transferred to the Federal Constitutional Court
and shall only be heard and decided by that Court.