[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/CrPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CrPC Section 118: Order to give security

(1) If, upon such inquiry, it is proved that it is necessary for keeping the
peace or maintaining good behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in respect of whom the inquiry is
made should execute a bond, with or without sureties the Magistrate shall make an order accordingly :
Provided—
first, that no person shall be ordered to give security of a nature different from, or of an amount larger than,
or for a period longer than, that specified in the order made under section 112 ;
secondly, that the amount of every bond shall be fixed with due regard to the circumstances of the case and
shall not be excessive :
thirdly, that when the person in respect of whom the inquiry is made is a minor, the bond shall be  executed
only by his sureties.
2
119. Discharge of person informed against. If, on an inquiry under section 117, it is not proved that
it is necessary  for  keeping  the  peace  or  maintaining good behaviour,  as  the  case  may  be,  that  the  person in
respect of whom the inquiry is made, should execute a bond, the Magistrate shall make  an entry on the  record
to that effect, and if such person is in custody only for the purposes of the inquiry, shall release him,  or, if such
person is not in custody, shall discharge him.
C.—Proceedings in all Cases subsequent to Order to furnish Security
2
[120. Commencement of period for which security is required.
(1) If any person, in respect of
whom an order requiring security is made under section 106 or section 118, is, at the  time  such order is made,
sentenced to, or undergoing a sentence of, imprisonment the period for which such  security  is  required shall
commence on the expiration of such sentence.
(2) In other cases such period shall commence on the date of such order unless the Magistrate, for
sufficient reason, fixes a later date.
2
[121. Contents of bond. The bond to be executed by any such person shall bind him to keep the peace
or to be of good behaviour, as the case may be, and in  the latter case the commission  or attempt to commit,  or
the abetment of, any offence punishable with imprisonment, wherever it  may be committed, is a breach    of
the bond.
3
[122. Power to reject sureties.
(1) A Magistrate may refuse to accept any surety offered, or may
reject any surety previously accepted by him or his predecessor under this Chapter on the ground that such
surety is an unfit person for the purposes of the bond :
Provided  that,  before  so  refusing  to  accept  or  rejecting  any  such  surety,  he  shall  either himself hold  an
inquiry on oath into the fitness of the surety, or cause such inquiry to be held and a report  to be  made  thereon
by a Magistrate subordinate to him.
1
Ss. 112 to 121 and 123 to 126 and s. 514 apply to all cases requiring security for good behaviour under s. 6 of the Punjab Frontier Crossing Regulation, 1873 (7 of 1873).
2
Ss.
112 to 121 and 123 to 126 and s. 514 apply to all cases requiring security for good behaviour under s. 6 of the Punjab Frontier Crossing Regulation, 1873 (7 of 1873).
3
Subs.
by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 20, for the original section.
67
(2) Such Magistrate shall, before holding inquiry, give  reasonable notice to the surety and to the person  by
whom the surety was offered and shall in making the inquiry record the substance of  the  evidence adduced
before him.
(3) If the Magistrate is satisfied, after considering the evidence so adduced either before him or before a
Magistrate deputed under sub-section (1), and the report of such Magistrate (if any) that the  surety is  an  unfit
person for the purposes of the bond, he shall make an order refusing to accept or rejecting, as the case may be,
such surety and recording his reasons for so doing :
Provided that, before making an order rejecting any surety who has previously been accepted, the Magistrate
shall issue his summons or warrant, as he thinks fit, and cause the person for whom the surety is bound to appear
or to be brought before him.]
1