[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 382: Theft  after  preparation  made  for  causing  death  hurt  or  restraint  in  order  to  the

committing of the theft. Whoever commits theft, having made preparation for causing death, or hurt,
or restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of restraint, to any person, in order to the committing of such
theft,  or in order  to  the  effecting  of his escape  after  the commiting of  such  theft,  or in order  to the
retaining of property taken by such theft, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustrations
a. A commits theft on property in Z’s possession ; and, while committing the theft, he has a
loaded pistol under his garment having provided this pistol for the purpose of hurting Z in
case Z should resist. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
b. A picks Z’s pocket, having posted  several of his companions near him in order that they
may restrain Z, if Z should perceive what is passing and should resist, or should attempt to
apprehend A. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
Of Extortion
383. Extortion. Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of any injury to that person, or to
any other, and thereby dishonestly induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any person any pro-
perty or valuable security or anything signed or sealed which may be converted into a valuable security,
commits “extortion”.
1
Ins. by Act 1 of 1996, s.2
2
Added by Act XVI of 1996, s.2
Illustrations
a. A threatens to publish a defamatory libel concerning Z unless Z gives him money. He thus
induces Z to give him money. A has committed extortion.
b. A  threatens  Z  that  he will keep Z’s child in wrongful  confinement  unless  Z will sign and
deliver to A a promissory note binding Z to pay certain money to A. Z signs and delivers
the note. A has committed extortion.
c. A threatens to send club-men to plough up Z’s field unless Z will sign and deliver to B a
bond binding Z under a penalty to deliver certain produce to B, and thereby induces Z to
sign and deliver the bond. A has committed extortion.
d. A, by putting Z in fear of grievous hurt, dishonestly induces Z to sign or affix his seal to a
blank paper and deliver it to A. Z signs and delivers the paper to A. Here, as the paper so
signed may be converted into a valuable security, A has committed extortion.
384. Punishment   for   extortion. Whoever, commits extortion   shall   be   punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to  three years, or with fine, or with
both.
385. Putting person in fear of injury in order to commit extortion. Whoever, in order to the
committing of extortion, puts any person in fear or attempts to put  any person in fear,  of  any injury,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine, or with both.
386. Extortion  by  putting  a  person  in  fear  of  death  or  grievous hurt. Whoever, commits
extortion by putting any person in fear of death or of grievous hurt to that person or to any other, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.