[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 222: Intentional  omission  to  apprehend  on  the  part  of  public  servant  bound  to  apprehend

person  under sentence  or  lawfully  committed. Whoever,  being  a public servant, legally bound  as
such public servant to apprehend or to keep in confinement any person under sentence of a Court of
Justice  for  any  offence
2
[or lawfully committed  to  custody],  intentionally omits to  apprehend  such
person, or intentionally suffers such person to escape or intentionally aids such person in escaping or
attempting to escape from such confinement, shall be punished as follows that is to say:
with
1
[imprisonment for life] or with  imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may
extend to fourteen years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been
apprehended, is under sentence of death; or
with  imprisonment  of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  seven  years,  with  or
without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, is subject, by a
sentence of a Court of Justice, or by virtue of a commutation of such sentence, to
1
[imprisonment for
life]
3
* * *
4
* * *
5
* * * or imprisonment for a term of ten years or upwards ; or
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended is subject, by a sentence
of  a  Court  of  Justice,  to imprisonment for  a  term  not  extending  to  ten  years
2
[or if the    person  was
lawfully committed to custody].
223. Escape  from confinement or custody  negligently suffered by public servant. Whoever,
being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to keep in confinement any  person charged
with or convicted of any offence
2
[or lawfully committed to custody], negligently suffers such persons
to escape from confinement, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend
to two years, or with fine, or with both.
224. Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful apprehension. Whoever intentional1y
offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of himself for any offence with
which  he is charged  or  of  which  he  has  been  convicted,  or  escapes  or  attempts  to  escape  from  any
custody in which he is lawfully detained for any such offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.
person
The punishment in this section is in addition to the punishment for which the
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
2
Ins. by the Indian Penal Code Amdt. Act, 1870 (27 of 1870), s. 8.
3
The words "or penal servitude for life," omitted by the Criminal Law (Extinction of Discriminatory Privileges) Act, 1949 (2 of 1950), Sch.
4
The words "or to transportation" omitted by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch.
5
The words "or penal servitude" omitted by Act 2 of 1950, Sch.
to be apprehended or detained in custody was liable for the offence with which he was charged, or of
which he was convicted.
225. Resistance   or   obstruction   to   lawful   apprehension   of   another   person. Whoever
intentionally offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of any other person
for an offence, or rescues or attempts to rescue any other person from any custody in which that person
is lawfully detained for an offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both ;
or, if the person to be apprehended, or the person rescued or attempted to be rescued, is charged
with  or  liable  to  be  apprehended  for  an  offence  punishable  with
l
[imprisonment  for  life],  or  im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine ;
or, if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is charged with or liable
to be apprehended for an offence punishable with death, shall be punished with imprisonment  of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine ;
or,  if the  person  to  be  apprehended  or  rescued,  or  attempted  to  be  rescued, is  liable under  the
sentence of a Court of Justice, or by virtue of a commutation of such a sentence, to
l
[imprisonment  for
life]
2
*  *  *
3
*  *  or imprisonment, for  a  term  of  ten  years  or  upwards,  shall  be  punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable
to fine ;
or, if the  person  to  be  apprehended  or  rescued,  or  attempted  to  be  rescued, is under  sentence  of
death, shall be punished with
1
[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment of either description for a term
not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
4
[225A. Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape, on part of public servant, in cases
not otherwise provided for. Whoever, being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to
apprehend, or to keep in confinement, any person in any case not provided for in section 221, section
222 or section 223, or in any other law for the time being in force, omits to apprehend that person or
suffers him to escape from confinement, shall be punished
(a) if he does so intentionally, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and
(b) if he  does  so negligently, with simple imprisonment for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  two
years, or with fine, or with both.
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
2
The words "or to transportation" omitted by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972). s. 2 and Sch.
3
The words "penal servitude," omitted by the Criminal Law (Extinction of Discriminatory Privileges) Act, 1949 (2 of 1950), Sch.
4
Subs. by the Indian Criminal Law Amdt. Act, 1886 (10 of 1886), s. 24(1), for the original section 225A, which was previously ins. by Act, 27 of
1870, s.9.