[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 498A: Prohibition of depriving women form inheriting   property

whoever by deceitful or illegal
means deprives any woman from inheriting any movable  or immovable property  at the  time of opening of
succession shall be punished with imprisonment for either description for a term which may extend to ten years
but not be less than five years or with a fine of one million rupees or both.
498B. Prohibition of forced marriage. whoever coerces or in any manner whatsoever compels a
woman to enter into marriage shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term, which may
extend to seven years or for a term which shall not be less than three years and shall also be liable to fine of five
hundred thousand rupees.[:]
2
2
[Provided that in case of a female child as defined in the child as defined  in  the  Child  Marriage Restraint
Act, 1929 (XIX of 1929), or a non-Muslim woman, the accused shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years but shall not be less than five years and shall also be liable
to fine which may extend to one million rupees.]
498C. Prohibition of marriage with the Holy Quran. whoever compels or arranges or facilitates the
marriage of a woman with the Holy Quran shall be punished with imprisonment of either description which may
extend to seven years which shall not be less than three years and shall be liable to fine of five hundred thousand
rupees.
Explanation. Oath by a woman on Holy Quran to remain unmarried for the rest of her life or, not to claim
her share of inheritance shall be deemed to be marriage with the Holy Quran.”.
1
Ins. by Act XXVI of 2011 s. 3.
2
Sub. Ins by Act IV of 2017, s.2.
CHAPTER XXI
OF DEFAMATION
499. Defamation. Whoever by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible
representations,  makes  or  publishes  any  imputation  concerning  any  person  intending  to  harm,  or
knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is
said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person[.]
1
1
* * *
Explanation 1. It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the
imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings
of his family or other near relatives.
Explanation 2. It may amount to defamation to make and imputation concerning a company or
an association or collection of persons as such.
Explanation 3.
to defamation.
Explanation 4.
An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount
No imputation is said to harm a persons’ reputation, unless that imputation
directly  or indirectly,  in  the  estimation  of  others,  lowers  the  moral  or  intellectual  character  of  that
person,  or  lowers  the  character  of  that  person  in  respect  of  his  caste  or  of  his  calling,  or  lowers  the
credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or
in a state generally considered as disgraceful.
Illustrations
(a) A says­“Z is an honest man ; he never stole B’s watch” ; intending to cause it to be believed
that Z did steal B's watch. This is defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions.
(b) A is asked who stole B’s watch. A points to Z, intending to cause it to be believed that Z
stole B’s watch. This is defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions.
(c) A draws a picture of Z running away with B’s watch, intending it to be believed that Z stole
B’s watch. This is defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions.
First Exception. Imputation of truth which public good requires to be made or published.
It is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any person, if it be for the public good
that the imputation should be made or published. Whether or not it is for the public good is a question
of fact.
1
Subs. and omitted by Act IV of 1986, s.2.
Second Exception. Public conduct of public servant. It is not defamation to express in good
faith  any  opinion  whatever  respecting  the  conduct  of  a  public  servant  in  the  discharge  of  his  public
functions, or respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further.
Third Exception. Conduct of any person touching any public question. It is not defamation
to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of any person touching any public
question, and respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further.
Illustration
It is not defamation in A to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting Z’s conduct in
petitioning Government on a public question in signing requisition for a meeting on a public question,
in presiding  or  attending  at  such meeting, in forming or joining any  society  which  invites  the public
support, in voting or canvassing for a particular candidate for any situation in the efficient discharge of
the duties of which the public is interested.
Fourth Exception. Publications of reports of proceedings of Courts. It is not defamation to
publish a substantially true report of the proceedings of a Court of Justice, or of the result of any such
proceedings.
Explanation. A Justice of the Peace or other officer holding an enquiry in open Court
preliminary to a trial in a Court of Justice, is a Court within the meaning of the above section.
Fifth Exception.  Merits of case decided in Court or conduct of witnesses and other concerned.
It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the merits of any case, civil
or criminal, which has been decided by a Court of Justice, or respecting the conduct of any person as a
party, witness or agent, in any such case, or respecting the character of such person, as far as his character
appears in that conduct, and no further.
Illustrations
(a) A says­“I think Z’s evidence  on  that  trial is so  contradictory  that  he must be  stupid  or
dishonest.” A is within this exception if he says this in good faith, inasmuch as the opinion
which he expresses respects Z’s character as it appears in Z’s conduct as a witness, and  no
further.
(b) But if A says­“I do not believe what Z asserted at that trial because I know him to be a man
without  veracity”.  A is not within this  exception,  inasmuch  as  the opinion which  he
expresses of Z’s character, is an opinion not founded on Z’s conduct as a witness.
Sixth Exception. Merits of public performance. It is not defamation to express in good faith
any opinion respecting the merits of any performance which its author has submitted to the judgment
of  the public,  or  respecting  the  character  of  the  author  so  far  as  his  character  appears  in  such
performance, and no further.
Explanation. A performance may be submitted to the judgment of the public expressly or by
acts on the part of the author which imply such submission to the judgment of the public.
Illustrations
(a) A person who publishes a book, submits that book to the judgment of the public.
(b) A person who makes a speech in public, submits that speech to the judgment of the public.
(c) An  actor  or singer who  appears  on  a public stage, submits  his acting  or singing to  the
judgment of the public.
(d) A says of a book published by Z­“Z’s book is foolish : Z must be a weak man. Z’s book is
indecent ; Z must be a man of impure mind.” A is within this exception, if he says this in
good faith, inasmuch as the opinion which he expresses of Z respects Z’s character only so
far as it appears in Z’s book, and no further.
(e) But if A says “I am not surprised that Z’s book is foolish and indecent, for he is a weak man
and a libertine.” A is not within this exception, inasmuch as the opinion which he expresses
of Z’s character is an opinion not founded on Z’s book.
Seventh  Exception.Censure passed  in good  faith  by person having lawful  authority  over
another. It is not defamation in a person having over another any authority, either conferred by law
or arising out of a lawful contract made with that other, to pass in good faith any censure on the conduct
of that other in matters to which such lawful authority relates.
Illustration
A Judge censuring in good faith the conduct of a witness, or of an officer of the Court ; a head of a
department censuring in good faith those who are under his orders ; a parent censuring in good faith a
child in the presence of other children ; a schoolmaster, whose authority is derived  from  a  parent,
censuring in good faith a pupil in the presence of other pupils ; a master censuring a servant in good
faith for remissness in service ; a banker censuring in good faith the cashier of his bank for the conduct
of such cashier as such cashier-are within this exception.
Eighth  Exception. Accusation preferred in good faith to authorized person. It is not defamation
to prefer in good preferred in faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful
authority over that person with respect to the subject matter of accusation.
Illustration
If A in good faith accuses Z before a Magistrate ; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of  Z,
a servant, to Z,s master ; if a in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a child, to Z’s father-A is
within this exception.
Ninth Exception. Imputation made in good faith by  person for  protection of his  or  other’s
interest. It  is  not  defamation  to  make  an  imputation  on  the  character  of  another,  provided  that  the
imputation  be made in good faith  for  the protection  of the interest  of the person  making  it, or of any
other person, or for the public good.
Illustrations
(a) A, a shopkeeper, says to B, who manages his Business­“Sells nothing to Z unless he pays
you ready money, for I have no opinion of his honesty.” A is within the exception, if he has
made this imputation on Z in good faith for the protection of his own interests.
(b) A, a Magistrate, in making a report to his own superior officer, casts an imputation on the
character of Z. Here, if the imputation is made in good faith, and for the public good. A is
within the exception.
Tenth Exception.  Caution  intended  for  good  or  person  to  whom conveyed  or  for public
good. It is not defamation to convey a caution, in good faith, to one person against another,
provided that such caution be intended for the good of the person to whom it is conveyed, or of some
person in whom that person is interested, or for the public good.
1
500.  Punishment  for  defamation. Whoever  defames  another  shall  be  punished  with  simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both
2
[.]
3
[Provided that the originator of the defamatory imputation shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which shall not be less
than one hundred thousand rupees, or with both.
Explanation . “Originator” means the initiator of a defamatory imputation.]
2
* * * * * * *
1
501. Printing or engraving matter known to be defamatory. Whoever prints or engraves any
matter, knowing or having good reason to believe that such matter is defamatory of any person, shall
be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.
502. Sale of printed or engraved substance containing defamatory matter. Whoever sells or
offers for sale any printed or engraved substance containing defamatory matter, knowing that it contains
such matter, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both.
3
[502A. Trial of offences under this Chapter.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), the Court of Session shall have the jurisdiction to try an
offence under this Chapter and decide it within a period of ninety days.]
1
In this section for the word "simple" the word "rigorous" has been subs. in its application to the Province of West Pakistan by (W. P. Act 32 of 1964), s. 2.
2
Subs. and omitted by Act, IV of 1986, s.2
3
subs and Ins by Act IX of 04, ss.7,8.
CHAPTER XXII
OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT AND ANNOYANCE
503. Criminal intimidation. Whoever threatens another with any injury to his person, reputation
or property, or to the person or reputation of anyone in whom that person is interested, with intent to
cause alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act which he is not legally bound to do, or
to omit to do any act which that person is legally entitled to do, as the means of avoiding the exe- cution
of such threat, commits criminal intimidation.
Explanation. A threat to injure the reputation of any deceased person in whom the person
threatened is interested, is within this section.
Illustration
A, for the purpose of inducing B to desist from prosecuting a civil suit, threatens to burn B’s house.
A is guilty of criminal intimidation.
504.  Intentional  insult  with  intent  to  provoke  breach  of  the  peace. Whoever  intentionally
insults,  and  thereby  gives  provocation  to  any  person,  intending  or  knowing  it  to  be  likely  that  such
provocation will cause him to break the public peace, or to commit any other offence, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.
1
[505.  Statement  conducing  to  public  mischief.
any statement, rumour or report,
(1) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates
(a) with intent to cause or incite, or which is likely to cause or incite, any officer, soldier, sailor,
or airman in the Army, Navy or Air Force of Pakistan to mutiny or otherwise disregard or
fail in his duty as such ; or
(b) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, fear or alarm to the public or to any section
of the public whereby any person may be induced to commit an offence against the State or
against the public tranquillity ; or
(c) with intent  to  incite,  or  which is  likely to  incite,  any  class  or  community  of  persons  to
commit any offence against any other class or community,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and with fine.
(2) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement or report containing rumour or alarming
news with intent to create or promote, or which is likely to create or promote, on grounds of religion,
race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or community or any other ground whatsoever, feelings
of enmity, hatred or ill-will between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or
communities, shall  be  punished with imprisonment for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  seven  years  and
with fine.
1
The original s. 505 have successively been amended by the Indian Penal Code (Amdt.) Act, 1898 (4 of 1898), s. 6, the Repealing and Amending Act
1927 (10 of 1927), s. 2 and Sch I, the Amending Act, 1934 (35 of 1934), s. 2 and Sch., A. O.1961, Art. 2 and Sch. (23-3-56), and the Criminal Law
(Amdt.) Act, 1973 (6 of 1973), s. 2 (w.e.f. 28th July, 1973), to read as above.
Explanation. It does not amount to an offence within the meaning of this section, when the
person making, publishing or circulating any such statement, rumour or report has reasonable grounds
for believing that such statement, rumour or report is true and makes, publishes or circulates it in good
faith and without any such intent as aforesaid.]
506.   Punishment for criminal   intimidation. Whoever commits the   offence   of criminal
intimidation shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both ;
If threat be to cause death or grievous hurt, etc. and if the threat be to cause death or grievous
hurt, or to cause the destruction of any property by fire, or to cause an offence punishable with death
or
1
[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or to
impute unchastity to a woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
507. Criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication. Whoever commits the offence
of criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication, or having taken precaution to conceal the
name  or  abode  of  the  person  from  whom  the  threat  comes,  shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, in addition to the punishment provided
for the offence by the last preceding section.