[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CPC Section 3: Service of process on recognized agent

_
(1) Processes served on
the recognized agent of a party shall be as effectual as if the same had been
served on the party in person, unless the Court otherwise directs.
(2) The provisions for the service of process on a party to a suit shall
apply to the service of process on his recognized agent.
1
[4. Appointment of pleader.
_
(1) No pleader shall act for any person in any
Court, unless he has been appointed for the purpose by such person by a
document in writing signed by such person or by his recognized agent or by some
other person duly authorized by or under a power-of-attorney to make such
appointment.
(2) Every such appointment shall be filed in Court and shall be
deemed to be in force until determined with the leave of the Court by a writing
signed by the client or the pleader, as the case may be, and filed in Court, or until
the client or the pleader dies, or until all proceedings in the suit are ended so far
as regards the client.
(3) For the purposes of sub-rule (2) an application for review of
judgment, an application under section 144 or section 152 of this Code, any
appeal from any decree or order in the suit and any application or act for the
purpose of obtaining copies of documents or return of documents produced or filed
in the suit or of obtaining refund of monies paid into the Court in connection with
the suit shall be deemed to be proceedings in the suit.
(4) The High Court may, by general order, direct that, where the
person by whom a pleader is appointed is unable to write his name, his mark
upon the document appointing the pleader shall be attested by such person and
in such manner as may be specified by the order.
(5) No pleader who has been engaged for the purpose of pleading only
shall plead on behalf of any party, unless he has filed in Court a memorandum of
appearance signed by himself and stating
_
(a) the names of the parties to the suit,
(b) the name of the party for whom he appears, and
(c) the name of the person by whom he is authorized to appear:
1
Substituted by the Code of Civil Procedure (Second Amendment) Act, 1926(22of 1926), s.2, for the original rule 4.
Provided that nothing in this sub-rule shall apply to any pleader engaged to
plead on behalf of any party by any other pleader who has been duly appointed to
act in Court on behalf of such party.]