[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 307: Cases in which Qisas for qatl-e-amd shall not be enforced

not be enforced in the following cases, namely:
(a) when the offender dies before the enforcement of qisas ;
(1) Qisas for qatl-i-amd shall
(b) when any wali voluntarily and without duress, to the satisfaction of the court, waives the
right of qisas under section 309 or compounds under section 310; and
(c) when the right of qisas devolves on the offender as a result of the death of the wali of the
victim, or on the person who has no right of qisas against the offender.
(2) To satisfy itself that the wali has waived the right of qisas under section 309 or compounded the
right of qisas under section 310 voluntarily and without duress the court shall take down the state- ment
of the wali and such other persons as it may deem necessary on oath and record an opinion that it is
satisfied that the waiver or, as the case may be, the composition, was voluntary and not the result of
any duress.
Illustrations
(i) A kills Z, the maternal uncle of his son B. Z has no other wali except D, the wife of A. D
has the right of qisas from A. But if D dies, the right of qisas shall devolve on her son B
who is also the son of the offender A. B cannot claim qisas against his father. Therefore,
the qisas cannot be enforced.
(ii) B kills Z, the brother of her husband A. Z has no heir except A. Here A can claim qisas
from his wife B. But if A dies, the right of qisas shall devolve on his son D who is also son
of B, the qisas cannot be enforced against B.
308. Punishment in qatl-e-amd not liable to qisas, etc. (1) Where an offender guilty of qatl-i-
amd is not liable to qisas under section 306 or the qisas is not enforceable under clause (c) of section
307, he shall be liable to diyat :
Provided that, where the offender is minor or insane, diyat shall be payable either from his property
or, by such person as may be determined by the court :
Provided further that where at the time of committing qatl-e-amd the offender being a minor, had
attained sufficient maturity or being insane, had a lucid interval, so as to be able to realize the conse-
quences of his act, he may also be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend twenty-five years as ta'zir:
Provided  further  that,  where  the qisas is not  enforceable  under  clause  (c)  of  section  307,  the
offender shall be liable to diyat only if there is any wali other than offender and if there is no wali other
than the offender, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to twenty-five years as ta'zir.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the court, having regard to the facts and
circumstances  of  the  case  in  addition  to  the  punishment  of diyat, may  punish  the  offender  with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to twenty-five years, as ta'zir.
309. Waiver-Afw of qisas in qatl-i-'amd. (1) In the case of qatl-i-'amd, an adult sane wali may,
at  any  time  and  without  any  compensation,  waive  his  right  of qisas:
Provided that the right of qisas shall not be waived-
(a) where the Government is the wali ; or
(b) where the right of qisas vests in a minor or
1
[;].
1
["Provided  further  that  where  the  principle  of fasad-fil-arz is  attracted,  waiver  of qisas shall  be
subject ot the provisions of section 311."]
(2) Where a victim has more than one wali, anyone of them may waive his right of qisas: Provided
that the wali who does not waive the right of qisas shall be entitled to his share of diyat.
(3) Where there are more than one victim, the waiver of the right of qisas by the wali of one victim
shall not affect the right of qisas of the wali of the other victim.
(4) Where there are more than one offenders, the waiver of the right of qisas against one offender
shall not affect the right of qisas against the other offender.
1
Ins. by Act XLV of 1860, s. 4.
310. Compounding of qisas (Sulh) in qatl-i- amd. (1) In the case of qatl-i- 'amd, an adult sane
wali may, at any time on accepting badal-i-sulh, compound his right of qisas:
1
[Provided that a female shall not be given in marriage or otherwise in badal-i-sulh"
2
[:]
2
[Provided
further that where the principle of fasad-fil-arz is attracted, compounding of the right
of qisas shall be subject to the provisions of section 311.].
(2) Where a wali is a minor or an insane, the wali of such minor or insane wali may compound the
right of qisas on behalf of such minor or insane wali:
Provided that the value of badal-i-sulh shall not be less than the value of diyat.
(3) Where  the  Government is the wali, it may  compound  the right of qisas:
Provided that the value of badal-i-sulh shall not be less than the value of diyat.
(4) Where the badal-i-sulh is not determined or is a property or a right the value of which cannot
be  determined in terms  of  money  under Shari'ah the right of qisas shall  be  deemed  to  have  been
compounded and the offender shall be liable to diyat.
(5) Badal-i-sulh may  be  paid  or given on  demand  or  on  a  deferred  date  as  may  be  agreed  upon
between the offender and the wali.
Explanation. In this section, Badal-i-sulh means the mutually agreed compensation according
to Shari'ah to be paid or given by the offender to a wali in cash or in kind or in the form of moveable
or immovable property.
3
[310A.  Punishment  for  giving  a  female  in  marriage  or  otherwise  in  badla-e-sulh,  wanni or
swara. Whoever gives a female in marriage or otherwise compels her to enter into marriage,
as badla-e-sulh, wanni, or swara or any other custom or practice under any name, in consideration
of  settling  a civil dispute  or  a criminal liability, shall  be  punished with  imprisonment of  either
description for a term which may extend to seven years but shall not be less than three years and
shall also be liable to fine of five hundred thousand rupees.".
4
["311. Ta'zir after waiver or compounding of right of qisas in qatl-i-amd.
Where all
the wali do not waive or compound the right of qisas, or if the principle of fasad-fil-arz is attracted,
the  court  may,  having  regard  to  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case,  punish  an  offender  against
whom  the  right  of qisas has  been  waived  or  compounded  with  death  or  imprisonment  for  life  or
imprisonment of either description for a term of which may extend to fourteen years as ta'zir.
Provided  that  if  the  offence  has  been  committed  in  the  name  of  or  on  the  pretext  of  honour,  the
punishment shall be imprisonment for life."]
5
[Provided  that  if  the  offence  has  been  omitted  in  the  name  or  on  the  pretext  of  honour,  the
imprisonment shall not be less than ten years]
1
Subs. by Act I of 2005, s. 6.
2
Ins. by Act XLV of 1860, s. 4.
3
Subs by Act 26 of 2011, s.2
4
Subs by Act XLIII of 2016, s. 6.
5
Ins, sub, omitted, added by Act 1 of 5, s.8
Explanation. For the purpose of this section, the expression fasad-fil-arz shall include the past
conduct of the offender, or whether he has any previous convictions, or the brutal or shocking manner
in which the offence has been committed which is outrageous to the public conscience, or if the offender
is considered a potential danger to the community.
1
[or if the offence has been committed in the name
or on the pretext of honour]
1
[Provided  that  if  the  offence  has  been  committed  in  the  name  or  on  the  pretext  of  honour,  the
imprisonment shall not be less than ten years]
1
[or if the offence has been committed in the name or on the pretext of honour.]
312. Qatl-i-'amd after waiver or compounding of qisas. Where a wali commits qatl-i-'amd of
a  convict  against  whom  the  right  of qisas has  been  waived  under  section  309  or  compounded  under
section 310, such wali shall be punished with
(a) qisas, if he had himself waived or compounded the right of qisas against the convict or had
knowledge of such waiver of composition by another wali; or
(b) diyat, if he had no knowledge of such waiver or composition.
313. Right of qisas in qatl-i-amd. (1) Where there is only one wali, he alone has the right of
qisas in qatl-i-amd but, if there are more than one, the right of qisas vests in each of them.
(2) If the victim
(a) has no wali the Government shall have the right of qisas; or
(b) has no wali other than a minor or insane or one of the wali is a minor or insane, the father
or if he is not alive the paternal grandfather of such wali shall have the right of qisas on his
behalf:
Provided that, if the minor or insane wali has no father or paternal grandfather, how high-so-ever,
alive and no guardian has been appointed by the court, the Government shall have the right of qisas on
his behalf.
314. Execution  of  qisas  in  qatl-i-amd. (1) Qisas in qatil-i-amd shall be executed by a
functionary of the Government by causing death of the convict as the court may direct.
(2) Qisas shall  not  be  executed  until  all  the wali are  present  at  the time of  execution,  either
personally or through their representatives authorised by them in writing in this behalf:
Provided that where a wali or his representative fails to present himself on the date, time  and place
of execution of qisas after having been informed of the date, time and place as certified by the court,
an officer authorised by the court shall give permission for the execution of qisas and the Government
shall cause execution of qisas in the absence of such wali.
1
Ins. sub, omitted, added by Act 1 of 5, s.8
(3) If the convict is a  woman who is pregnant, the court may, in consultation with an authorised
medical officer, postpone the execution of qisas upto a period of two years after the birth of the child
and during this period she may be released on bail on furnishing of security to the satisfaction of the
court or, if she is not so released, she shall be dealt with as if sentenced to simple imprisonment.
315. Qatl shibh-i 'amd. Whoever, with intent to cause harm to the body or mind of any
person  causes  the  death  of  that  or  of  any  other  person  by  means  of  a  weapon  or  an  act  which  in  the
ordinary course of nature is not likely to cause death is said to commit qatl-shibh-i- 'amd.
Illustration
A in order to cause hurt strikes Z with a stick or stone which in the ordinary course of nature is
not likely to cause death. Z dies as a result of such hurt. A shall be guilty of qatl shibh-i- 'amd.
316. Punishment for qatl shibh­I­‘amd. Whoever commits qatl shibh­‘amd shall be liable to
diyat and may also be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to
1
[twenty-five years] as ta’zir.
317. Person committing qatl debarred from succession. Where a person committing qatl-i-
'amd or qatl shibh-i-'amd is an heir or a beneficiary under a will, he shall be debarred from succeeding
to the estate of the victim as an heir or a beneficiary.
318. Qatl-i-khata. Whoever, without any intention to cause the death of, or cause harm to, a
person causes death of such person, either by mistake of act or  by  mistake of fact, is said to commit
qatl-i-khata.
Illustration
(a) A aims at a deer but misses the target and kills Z who is standing by A is guilty of qatl-i-
khata.
(b) A shoots at an object to be a boar but it turns out to be a human being. A is guilty of qatl-
i-khata.
319. Punishment for qatl-i-khata. Whoever commits qatl-i-khata shall be liable to diyat:
Provided  that,  where qatl-i-khata is committed  by  any  rash  or negligent act, other  than  rash  or
negligent driving, the offender may, in addition to diyat, also be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to five years as ta'zir.
320. Punishment for qatlikhata  by  rash or negligent driving. Whoever commits qatl-i-
khata by rash or negligent driving shall, having regard to the facts and circumstances of  the case, in
addition to diyat, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years.
321. Qatl-bis-sabab. Whoever, without any intention to cause death of, or cause harm to, any
person, does any unlawful act which becomes a cause for the death of another person, is said to commit
qatl-bis-sabab.
1
Subs. by Act I of 2005, s. 9 for “Fourteen Years”.
Illustration
A  unlawfully  digs  a  pit  in  the  thoroughfare,  but  without  any  intention  to  cause  death  of,  or  harm  to,  any
person. B while passing from there falls in it and is killed. A has committed qatl-bis-sabab.
322. Punishment for qatl-bis-sabab. Whoever commits qatl-bis-sabab shall be liable to diyat.
323. Value of diyat. (1) The court shall, subject to the Injunctions of Islam as laid down in the Holy
Quran and Sunnah and keeping in view the financial position of the convict and the heirs of the victim, fix the
value of diyat which shall not be less than, the value of thirty thousand six hundred and thirty grams of silver.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the Federal Government shall, by
2
notification in the official Gazette,
declare the value of silver, on the first day of July each year or on such date as it may deem fit, which shall be
the value payable during a financial year.
COMMENTS