[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://na.gov.pk/uploads/documents/6926e060076ed_467.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

Constitution Section 114: No discussion shall take place in a Provincial Assembly

with respect to the conduct of any Judge of
2
[the Federal
Constitutional Court,] the Supreme Court or of a High Court in
the discharge of his duties.
115. (1) A Money Bill, or a Bill or amendment which if enacted
and brought into operation would involve expenditure from the
Provincial Consolidated Fund or withdrawal from the Public
Account of the Province shall not be introduced or moved in the
Provincial Assembly except by or with the consent of the
Provincial Government.
(2)    For the purposes of this Article, a Bill or amendment
shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains provisions
dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely:–
(a)    the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or
regulation of any tax;
(b)    the borrowing of money, or the giving of any
guarantee, by the Provincial Government or the
amendment of the law relating to the financial
obligations of that Government;
(c)    the custody of the Provincial Consolidated Fund, the
payment of moneys into, or issue of moneys from, that
Fund;
(d)    the imposition of a charge upon the Provincial
Consolidated Fund, or the abolition or alteration of
any such charge;
Qualifications
and disqualifi-
cations for
membership of
Provincial
Assembly.
Restriction on
discussion in
Provincial
Assembly.
Provincial
Government’s
consent
required for
financial
measures.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN                        61
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Subs. by P. O. No. 14 of 1985, Art. 2 and Sch., for “Article 113”.
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-Seventh Amdt.) Act, 2025 (32 of 2025), s. 13.
(e)    the receipt of moneys on account of the Public
Account of the Province, the custody or issue of such
moneys; and
(f)    any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in
the preceding paragraphs.
(3)    A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by
reason only that it provides–
(a)    for the imposition or alteration of any fine or other
pecuniary penalty or for the demand or payment of a
licence fee or a fee or charge for any service rendered;
or
(b)    for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or
regulation of any tax by any local authority or body
for local purposes.
(4)    If any question arises whether a Bill is a Money Bill
or not, the decision of the Speaker of the Provincial Assembly
thereon shall be final.
(5)    Every Money Bill presented to the Governor for
assent shall bear a certificate under the hand of the Speaker of the
Provincial Assembly that it is a Money Bill and such certificate
shall be conclusive for all purposes and shall not be called in
question.
1
[116.(1)  When a Bill has been passed by the Provincial
Assembly, it shall be presented to the Governor for assent.
(2)    When a Bill is presented to the Governor for assent,
the Governor shall, within
2
[ten] days,–
(a)    assent to the Bill; or
(b)    in the case of a Bill other than a Money Bill, return the
Bill to the Provincial Assembly with a message
requesting that the Bill, or any specified provision
thereof, be reconsidered and that any amendment
specified in the message be considered.
3
[(3)  When the Governor has returned a Bill to the
Provincial Assembly, it shall be reconsidered by the Provincial
Governor’s
assent to Bills.
62                         CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Subs. by P. O. No. 14 of 1985, Art. 2 and Sch., for “Article 116”.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 38, for
“thirty”.
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighth Amdt.) Act, 1985 (18 of 1985), s. 15,  for
“clause (3)”.
Assembly and, if it is again passed, with or without amendment,
by the Provincial Assembly, by the votes of the majority of the
members of the Provincial Assembly present and voting, it shall
be again presented to the Governor and the Governor shall
1
[give
his assent within ten days, failing which such assent shall be
deemed to have been given].]
(4)    When the Governor has assented
2
[or is deemed to
have assented] to a Bill, it shall become law and be called an Act
of Provincial Assembly.
(5)    No Act of a Provincial Assembly, and no provision in
any such Act, shall be invalid by reason only that some
recommendation, previous sanction or consent required by the
Constitution was not given if that Act was assented to in
accordance with the Constitution.]
117. (1)    A Bill pending in a Provincial Assembly shall not
lapse by reason of the prorogation of the Assembly.
(2)    A Bill pending in a Provincial Assembly shall lapse on
the dissolution of the Assembly.
Financial Procedure
118. (1)    All revenues received by the Provincial Government,
all loans raised by that Government, and all moneys received by
it in repayment of any loan, shall form part of a consolidated
fund, to be known as the Provincial Consolidated Fund.
(2)    All other moneys–
(a)    received   by   or   on   behalf   of   the   Provincial
Government; or
(b)    received by or deposited with the High Court or any
other court established under the authority of the
Province;
shall be credited to the Public Account of the Province.