[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://khalidzafar.com/wp-content/files_mf/1527158791QanuneShahadatOrder1984.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-14

QSO Section 154: What matters may be proved in connection with proved statement relevant under Article

46 or 47. Whenever any statement, relevant under Article 46 or 47, is proved, all matters may
be proved either in order to contradict or corroborate it, or in order to impeach or confirm the
credit of the person by whom it was made, which might have been proved if that person had
been called as a witness and had denied upon cross-examination the truth of the matter
suggested.
155. Refreshing memory. (1) A witness may, while under examination of afresh his memory by
referring to any writing made by himself at the time of the transaction concerning which he is
questioned, or so soon afterwards that the Court considers it likely that the transaction was at
that time fresh in his memory.
(2) The witness may also refer to any such writing made by any other person, and read by the
witness within the time aforesaid, if when he read it he knew it to be correct.
(3) Whenever a witness may refresh memory by reference to any document, he may, with the
permission of the Court, refer to a copy of such document:
Provided that Court be satisfied that there is sufficient reason for the non-production of the
original.
(4) An expert may refresh his memory by reference to professional treatise.
156. Testimony to facts stated in document mentioned in Article 155. A witness may also testify
to fact mentioned in any such document as is mentioned in Article 155, although he has no
specific recollection of the facts themselves, if he is sure that the facts were correctly recorded
in the document.
Illustration
A book-keeper may testify to facts recorded by him in books regularly kept in the course of
business, if he knows that the books were correctly kept, although he has forgotten the
particular transactions entered.
157. Right of adverse party as to writing used to refresh memory. Any writing referred to under
the provisions of the two last preceding Articles must be produced and shown to the adverse
party if he requires it such party may, if he pleases, cross-examine the witness thereupon.
158. Production of document. (1) A witness summoned to produce a document shall, if it is in
his possession or power, bring it to Court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be to
its production or to its admissibility. The validity of any objection shall be decided on by the
Court.
(2) The Court, if it sees fit, may inspect the document, unless it refers to matters of State, or
take other evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility.
(3) If for such a purpose it is necessary to cause any document to be translated, the Court may,
if it thinks fit, direct the translator to keep the contents secret, unless the document is to be
given in evidence; and, if the translator disobeys such direction, he shall be held to have
committed an offence under Section 166 of the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860).
159. Giving, as evidence, of document called for and produced on notice. When a party calls for
a document which he has given the other party notice to produce, and such document is
produced and inspected by the partly calling for its production, he is bound to give it as
evidence if the party producing it requires him to do so.
160. Using, as evidence, of document production of which was refused on notice. When a party
refuses to produce a document which he has had notice to produce, he cannot afterwards use
the document as evidence without the consent of the other party or the order of the Court.
Illustration
A sues B on an agreement and gives B a notice to produce it.
At the trial A calls for the document and B refuses to produce it. A gives secondary evidence of
its contents. B seeks to produce the document itself to contradict the secondary evidence given
by A, or in order to show that the agreement is not stamped. He cannot do so.
161. Judge‘s power to put question or order production. The Judge may, in order to discover or
to obtain proper proof of relevant facts, ask any question he places, in any form, at any time, of
any witness, or of the parties about any fact relevant or irrelevant; and may order the
production of any document or things and neither the parties nor their agents shall be entitled
to make any objection to any such question or order, nor, without the leave of the Court, to
cross-examine any witness upon any answer given in reply to any such question:
Provided that the judgment must be based upon facts declared by this Order to be relevant,
and duly proved:
Provided also that this Article shall not authorize any Judge to compel any witness to answer
any question or to produce any document which such witness would be entitled to refuse to
answer or produce under Articles 4 to 14, both inclusive, if the question was asked or the
document was called for by the adverse party: nor shall the Judge ask any question which it
would be improper for any other person to ask under Article 143 or 144; nor shall he dispense
with primary evidence of any document, except in the cases herein before excepted.
CHAPTER XI
OF IMPROPER ADMISSION AND REJECTION OF
EVIDENCE
162. No new trial for improper admission or rejection of evidence. The improper admission or
rejection of evidence shall not be ground of itself for a new trial or reversal of any decision in
any case, if it shall appear to the Court before which such objection is raised that, independent
of the evidence objected to and admitted, there was sufficient evidence to justify the decision,
or that, if the rejected evidence had been received, it ought not to have varied the decision.
CHAPTER XII
DECISION OF CASE ON THE BASIS OF OATH
163. Acceptance or denial of claim on oath. — (1) When the plaintiff takes oath in support of
his claim, the court shall, on the application of the plaintiff, call upon the defendant to deny the
claim on oath.
(2) The Court may pass such orders as to costs and other matters as it may deem fit.
(3) Nothing in this Article applies to laws relating to the enforcement of Hudood or other
criminal cases.
COMMENTARY
Special oath by one of the plaintiffs. Effect. During proceedings of second appeal, one of
plaintiff/appellant filed application wherein he stated that if the specified defendant, swore on
Holy Quran and stated that consideration for the sale had been paid to the appellant, he would
not object to the decree passed in favour of defendants being maintained. Defendants accepted
the challenge and took the special oath, whereupon High Court dismissed the second appeal.
Petitioner‘s plea in petition for leave to appeal, was that the plaintiff making the offer of special
oath had been authorized to make it only on behalf of favour of sisters and himself, but he had
no authority to make any statement in Court or compromise the suit, appeal, etc. On behalf of
remaining three brothers viz. Petitioners herein, and hence special oath taken by the defendant
did not bind them. Supreme Court, however, found that the Advocate in second appeal was
jointly engaged by all the plaintiffs including the present petitioners and that such Advocate was
present in Court throughout the proceedings; special oath was taken before him and order of
court was also passed in his presence. No plea was raised before High Court to the effect that
the appeal of present petitioners could not be dismissed in pursuance of the statement on oath
by the defendant, in pursuance of the offer of their brother as the latter did not represent them.
Supreme Court declined to exercise its discretionary jurisdiction to grant leave to appeal
petitioners on the basis of plea raised by them, before the Supreme Court.8
Provisions as to oath apply to civil cases. They do not apply to criminal or hudood cases.
Working of Trial Court applying Art. 163 to criminal cases cannot be approved.9
Provisions of special oath under Art. 163 do not apply to criminal proceedings.10
Denial of claim by defendant on Oath. Effect. Parties to suit taking Oath, one affirming the claim
and the other denying the same. Trial Court dismissed suit, also the Appellate Court, High Court
in revision, remanding case to Trial Court for decision on basis of evidence which stood already
recorded. Validity. Provision of Art. 163, Qanun-e-Shahadat, 1984 does not lay down what
would be the consequences if defendant does or does not deny plaintiff‘s claim on Oath. Order
of remand passed by High Court, thus, seemed to be proper, warranting no interference. Leave
to appeal was refused in circumstances.11
Applicability of Art. 163, Qanun-e-Shahadat, 1984 to criminal cases. Procedure of swearing on
the Holy Qur‘an (oath proceedings) is not applicable in criminal cases.7
CHAPTER XIII
MISCELLANEOUS
164. Production of evidence that has become available because of modern devices, etc. — In
such cases as the Court may consider appropriate, the Court may allow to be produced any
evidence that may have become available because of modern devices or techniques.
165. Order to override other laws. — The provisions of this Order shall have effect
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force.
166. Repeal. — [The Evidence Act, 1872 (I of 1872) is hereby repealed.]
________________
.