[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CPC Section 2: And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:

(i)  that defendant No.1 do pay into Court on or before the said             day
ofor any later date up to which time for payment may be extended by the Court the
said sumof Rs.    due to defendant No. 2.
(Similar declarations to be introduced with regard to the amount due to the
plaintiff, defendant No. 2 being at liberty to pay such amount.)
(ii)  that, on payment of the sum declared due to defendant No. 2 by
defendant No.1 in the
manner prescribed in clause 2 (i) and on payment thereafter before such
date as the Court may fix of such amount as the Court may adjudge due in
respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as may
be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be
payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff and defendant No. 2 shall bring into Court all
documents in their possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in
the plaint mentioned, and all such documents (except such as relate only to the
sub-mortgage) shall be delivered over to defendant No. 1, or to such person as he
appoints, and defendant No. 2 shall, if so required, re-convey or re-transfer the
property to defendant No.1 free from the said mortgage clear of and from all
in-cumbrances created by defendant No.2 or any person claiming under him or any
person under whom he claims, and free from all liability arising from the mortgage
or this suit and shall, if so required, deliver up to defendant No.1 quiet and
peaceable possession of the said property; and
(iii)  that, upon payment into the Court by defendant No.1 of the
amount due to defendant No.2, the plaintiff shall be at liberty to apply for payment
to him of the sum declared due to him together with any subsequent costs of the
suit and other costs, charges and expenses as may be payable under rule 10,
together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of
Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that
the balance, if any, shall then be paid to defendant No. 2; and that if the amount
paid into the Court be not sufficient to pay in full the sum due to the plaintiff, the
plaintiff shall be at liberty (if such remedy is open to him by the terms of the
mortgage and is not barred by any law for the time being in force) to apply for
a personal decree against defendant No.2 for the amount of the balance.
3. And it is further ordered and decreed that if defendant No.2 pays into Court
to the credit of this suit the amount adjudged due to the plaintiff shall bring into
the Court all documents, etc. [as in sub- clause (ii) of clause 2].