[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 65: Limit to imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when imprisonment and fine awardable

The term for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned in default of payment of a fine shall
not exceed one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which is the maximum fixed for the offence, if the
offence be punishable with imprisonment as well as fine.
1
Subs. by the Indian Penal Code Amdt. Act, 1882 (8 of 1882), s. 2, for “in every case in which an offender is sentenced to a fine”.
2
Ins. by the Indian Criminal Law Amdt. Act, 1886 (10 of 1886), s. 21(2).
35
66. Description of imprisonment for non-payment of fine. The imprisonment which the Court
imposes in default of payment of a fine may be of any description to which the offender might have
been sentenced for the offence.
67. Imprisonment  for  non-payment  of  fine,  when  offence  punishable  with  fine  only. If  the
offence be punishable with fine only,
1
[the imprisonment which the Court imposes in default of payment
of the fine shall be simple, and] the term for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned, in
default of payment of fine, shall not exceed the following scale, that is to say, for any term not exceeding
two months when the amount of the fine shall not exceed fifty rupees, and for any term not exceeding
four months when the amount shall not exceed one hundred rupees, and for any term not exceeding six
months in any other case.
68. Imprisonment  to  terminate  on  payment  of  fine. The  imprisonment which is imposed in
default of payment of a fine shall terminate whenever that time is either paid or levied by process of
law.
69. Termination  of  imprisonment  on  payment  of  proportional  part  of  fine. If,  before  the
expiration of the term of imprisonment fixed in default of payment, such a proportion of the fine be
paid or levied that the term of imprisonment suffered in default of payment is not less than proportional
to the part of the fine still unpaid, the imprisonment shall terminate.
Illustration
A  is  sentenced  to  a  fine  of  one  hundred  rupees  and  to  four  months'  imprisonment  in  default  of
payment. Here, if seventy-five rupees of the fine be paid or levied before the expiration of one month
of the imprisonment, A will be discharged as soon as the first month has expired. If seventy-five rupees
be paid or levied at the time of the expiration of the first month, or at any later time while A continues
in imprisonment, A will be immediately discharged. If fifty rupees of the fine be paid or levied before
the expiration of two months of the imprisonments, A will be discharged as soon as the two months
are completed. If fifty rupees be paid or levied at the time of the expiration to those two months, or at
any later time while A continues in imprisonment, A will be immediately discharged.
70. Fine leviable within six years, or during imprisonment. Death not to discharge property
from liability. The fine, or any part thereof which remains unpaid, may be levied at any time within
six years after the passing of the sentence, and if, under the sentence, the offender be liable to impri-
sonment for a longer period than six years, then at any time previous to the expiration of that period ;
and the death of the offender does not discharge from the liability any property which would, after his
death, be legally liable for his debts.
71. Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences. Where anything which is an
offence is made up of parts, any of which parts is itself an offence, the offender shall not be punished
with the punishment of more than one of such his offences, unless it be so expressly provided.
2
[Where anything is an offence falling within two or more separate definitions of any law in force
for the time being by which offences are defined or punished, or
1
Ins. by the Indian Penal Code Amdt. Act, 1882 (8 of 1882), s. 3
2
Added ibid, s. 4.
36
where several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves constitute an offence,
constitute, when combined, a different offence,
the offender shall not be punished with a more severe punishment than the Court which tries him could
award for anyone of such offences.]
Illustrations
(a) A gives Z fifty strokes with a stick. Here A may have committed the offence of voluntarily
causing hurt to Z by the whole beating, and also by each of the blows which make up the
whole beating. If A were liable to punishment for every blow, he might be imprisoned for
fifty years, one for each blow. But he is liable only to one punishment for the whole beating.
(b) But if, while A is beating Z, Y interferes, and A intentionally strikes Y, here, as the blow
given to Y is no part of the act whereby A voluntarily causes hurt to Z, A is liable to one
punishment for voluntarily causing hurt to Z, and to another for the blow given to Y.