[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 216: Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody or whose apprehension has been

ordered Whenever any person convicted of or charged with an offence, being in lawful custody for
that offence, escapes from such custody,
or whenever a public servant, in the exercise of the lawful powers of such public servant, orders a
certain  person  to  be  apprehended  for  an  offence,  whoever,  knowing  of  such  escape  or  order  for
apprehension,  harbours  or  conceals  that  person  with  the  intention  of  preventing  him  from  being
apprehended, shall be punished in the manner following, that is to say,
if  a  capital  offence ; if  the  offence  for  which  the  person  was  in  custody  or  is  ordered  to  be
apprehended is punishable with death, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
2
Subs. by the Indian Penal Code Amdt. Act, 1882 (8 of 1882), s. 6, for the original Exception.
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;
if  punishable  with  imprisonment  for  life,  or  with  imprisonment. if the  offence is punishable
with
1
[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment for ten years, he shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, with or without fine;
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year and not to ten
years, he shall be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term
which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of the imprisonment provided for such offence
or with fine, or with both.
2
["Offence" in this section includes also any act or omission of which a person is alleged to have
been  guilty  out  of
3
[Pakistan]  which,  if  he  had  been  guilty  of  it  in
3
[Pakistan],  would  have  been
punishable as an offence, and for which he is, under any law relating to extradition,
4
* * * or otherwise,
liable to be apprehended or detained in custody in
3
[Pakistan], and every such act or omission shall,
for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be punishable as if the accused person had been guilty
of it in
3
[Pakistan].]
Exception. This provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour or concealment is by
the husband or wife of the person to be apprehended.
5
[216A.  Penalty  for  harbouring  robbers  or  dacoits. Whoever,  knowing  or  having  reason  to
believe that any persons are about to commit or have recently committed robbery or dacoity, harbours
them or any of them, with the intention of facilitating the commission of such robbery or dacoity, or of
screening them or any of them from punishment, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation. For the purposes of this section, it is immaterial whether the robbery or dacoity is
intended to be committed, or has been committed, within or without
3
[Pakistan].
Exception. This provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour is by the husband or
wife of the offender.
216B. [Definition of " harbour" in sections 212, 216 and 216 A.] Omitted by the Penal Code (Amdt.)
Act, 1942 (VIII of 1942), s. 3.