[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/CrPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CrPC Section 164: Power to record statements and confessions

(1)
2
[
3
* * *,Any Magistrate of the first class and
any Magistrate of the second class specially empowered in this behalf by the
4
[Provincial Government] may, if
he is not a police officer] record any statement or confession made to him in the course of an investigation under
this Chapter or at any time afterwards before the commencement of the inquiry or trial.
5
[(1-A) Any such statement may be recorded by such Magistrate in the presence of the accused, and the
accused given an opportunity of cross-examining the witness making the statement.]
(2) Such statements shall be recorded in such of the manners hereinafter prescribed for recording evidence
as is, in his opinion best fitted for the circumstances of the case.  Such  confessions  shall  be recorded and signed
in the  manner  provided in section  364,  and  such  statements  or  confessions  shall  then  be  forwarded  to  the
Magistrate by whom the case is to be inquired into or tried.
(3)
6
[A Magistrate shall, before recording any such confession, explain to the person making it that he is
not bound to make a confession and that if he does so it may be used as evidence against him and no Magistrate]
shall record any such confession unless, upon questioning the person making it, he has reason to believe that it
was made voluntarily; and, when he records any confession, he shall make a memorandum at
the foot of such record to the following effect :
1
Added by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Second Amdt.) Act, 1941 (15 of 1941), s. 2.
2
Subs. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 35, for Every Magistrate not being a police officer may”.
3
The words “Any Presidency Magistrate”, omitted by A. O. 1949, Sch.
4
Subs. by A.O., 1937, for “L.G.”.
5
Sub-section (1-A) added by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972) s.2 and Sch.
6
Subs. by Act 18 of 1923, s. 35, for “No Magistrate”.
87
1
["I have  explained to (name) that  he  is not  bound to make  a  confession and that, if he  does so, any
confession he may make may be used as evidence against him and I believe] that this confession was voluntarily
made. It was taken in my presence and hearing, and was read over to the person making it and admitted by him
to be correct, and it contains a full and true account of the statement made by him.
(Signed)  A.B.,
Magistrate."
Explanation. It is not necessary that the Magistrate receiving and recording a confession or statement
should be a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case.
2
[164A. Medical examination of victim of rape, etc.
(1) Where an offence of committing rape,
unnatural offence or sexual abuse or attempt to commit rape, unnatural offence or  sexual abuse  under  section
376, section 377 or section 377B respectively of the  Pakistan Penal Code, 1860(Act  XLV of 1860)   is under
investigation, the victim shall be examined by a registered medical practitioner, in the  case  of female victim
by a female registered medical practitioner, immediately after commission of such offence:
Provided that in all cases, where possible, the female victim shall be escorted by a female police officer
or a family member from a place of her convenience to the place of medical examination.
(2) The registered medical practitioner to whom such victim is sent under sub-section (1) shall, without
delay, examine the victim and prepare a report of examination giving the following particulars, namely:
(a) name and address of the victim and of the person by whom she was excorted;
(b) age of the victim;
(c) description of material taken from body of the victim for DNA profiling;
(d) marks of injury, if any, on body of the victim;
(e) general mental condition of the victim; and
(f) other material particulars in reasonable detail.
(3) The report under sub-section (2) shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at.
(4) The report under sub-section (2) shall specifically record that consent of the victim or of his or her
natural or legal guardian to such examination had been obtained.
(5) The exact time of commencement  and completion of the  examination under sub-section (1) shall
also be noted in the report.
1
Subs. ibid., for “I believe”.
2
Ins. by Act XLIV of 2016,s.11.
88
(6) The registered medical practitioner shall, without delay, forward the report to  the  investigation officer
who shall forward it to the Magistrate along with other requirements as specified under clause (a) of sub-section
(1) of section 173.
(7) Nothing in this section shall be construed as rendering lawful any examination without consent of the
victim or of any person authorized under sub-section (4).
Explanation. In this section, "registered medical practitioner"means a medical practitioner who
possesses any qualification recognized as such under the Pakistan Medical and Dental Council Ordinance, 1962
(XXXII of 1962) and whose name has accordingly been entered in the Register maintained in this  behalf under
the said Ordinance and has been authorized by the Government to conduct such examination.
164B. DNA test. (1) Where an offence under section 376, section 377 or section 377B of the Pakistan
Penal Code, 1860 (XLV of 1860) is committed or attempted to have been committed or is alleged to have  been
committed, Deoxyribo Nucleic Acid (DNA) samples, where practicable, shall be collected from the victim with
his or her consent or with the consent of his or her natural or legal guardian and the accused during the medical
examination  conducted  under  section  164A within optimal time period  of  receiving  information  relating  to
commission of such offence.
(2)  The  DNA  sample  collected  under  sub-section  (1)  shall  at  the  earliest  be  sent  for  investigation  to  a
forensic laboratory where these shall be properly examined and preserved:
Provided that confidentiality of such examination shall at all times be observed.].