[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 165: Public servant obtaining valuable thing, without consideration from person concerned

in  proceeding  or  business transacted  by  such  public  servant. Whoever,  being  a public servant,
accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain, for himself, or for any other person, any
valuable thing without consideration, or for a consideration which he knows to be inadequate,
from any person  whom he knows to have been, or to be,  or to be  likely to be concerned  in any
proceeding  or  business  transacted  or  about  to  be  transacted  by  such  public  servant,  or  having  any
connection with the official functions of himself or of any public servant to whom he is subordinate,
or from any person whom he knows to be interested in or related to the person so concerned, shall
be, punished with
3
[imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years], or with fine, or with both.
l
Subs. by A. O., 1937 for “with the Legislative or Executive G. of I., or with the Govt. of any Presidency, or with any Lieutenant Governor”.
2
Subs. by the Federal Adaptation of Laws Order, 1975 (P.O. No. 4 of 1975), Art. 2 and Table for “Central”.
3
Subs. by the Criminal Law Amdt. Act, 1953 (37 of 1953), s. 2, for “simple Imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years.”
Illustrations
(a) A, a Collector, hires a house of Z, who has a settlement case pending before him. It is agreed that  A
shall pay fifty rupees a month, the house being such that, if the bargain were made in good faith, A
would be  required  to  pay two  hundred rupees  a month. A has obtained  a  valuable thing from  Z
without adequate consideration.
(b) A,  a  Judge,  buys  of Z, who has a  case pending in A’s Court, Government promissory notes at  a
discount, when they are selling in the market at a premium. A has obtained a valuable thing from Z
without adequate consideration.
(c) Z’s brother is  apprehended and taken  before  A,  a  Magistrate,  on  a charge of perjury. A  sells  to Z
shares in a bank at a premium, when they are selling in the market at a discount. Z pays A for the
shares accordingly. The money so obtained by A is a valuable thing obtained by him without ade-
quate consideration.
1
[165A. Punishment for abetment of offences defined in sections 161 and 165. Whoever abets
any offence punishable under section 161 or section 165 shall, whether the offence abetted is or is not committed
in consequence of the abetment, be punished with the punishment provided for the offence.]
2
[165B. Certain abettors excepted. A person shall be deemed not to abet an offence punishable under
section  161  or  section  165  if he is  induced,  compelled,  coerced,  or intimidated to offer or give any such
gratification  as  is  referred  to  in  section  161  for any of the purposes mentioned therein, or any valuable thing
without consideration, or for an inadequate consideration, to any such public servant as is referred to in section
165.]