[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 458: Lurking house-trespass or house breaking by night after preparation for hurt, assault

or wrongful restraint. Whoever commits lurking house-trespass by night or house-breaking by night,
having made preparation for causing hurt to any person or for assaulting any person, or for wrongfully
restraining any person, or for putting any person in fear of hurt, or of assault, or of wrongful restraint,
shall  be  punished with  imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  fourteen
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
1
[459.  Hurt  caused  whilst  committing  lurking  house-trespass  or house-breaking. Whoever,
whilst committing lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, causes hurt to any person or attempts to
commit qatl of, or hurt to, any person, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment
of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  ten  years,  and  shall  also  be  liable  to  the  same
punishment for committing qatl or causing hurt or attempting to cause Qatl or hurt as is specified in
Chapter XVI of this Code.]
1
[460. Persons jointly concerned in lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night
punishable  for  qatl  or  hurt  caused  by  one  of  them.
house-trespass by night or house-breaking by night,
1
Subs. by Act II of 1997, Ss. 8 & 9.
If, at the time of the committing of lurking
any person guilty of such offence shall voluntarily cause or attempt to commit qatl, of or hurt to,
any  person,  every  person jointly concerned in committing such lurking house-trespass  by night, or
house-breaking by night, shall be punished with imprisonment for life or, with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to the same punishment
for committing qatl or causing hurt to attempting to cause qatl or hurt as is specified in Chapter XVI of
this Code.]
461. Dishonestly-breaking open receptacle containing property. Whoever dishonestly or with
intent to commit mischief breaks open or unfastens any closed receptacle which contains or which he
believes to contain property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.