[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CPC Section 18: Execution in case of cross-decrees

_
(1) Where applications are
made to a Court for the execution of cross-decrees in separate suits for the
payment of two sums of money passed between the same parties and capable of
execution at the same time by such Court, then-
(a) if the two sums are equal, satisfaction shall be entered upon
both decrees; and
(b) if the two sums are unequal, execution may be taken out only
by the holder of the decree for the larger sum and for so
much only as remains after deducting the smaller sum, and
satisfaction for the smaller sum shall be entered on the decree
for the larger sum as well as satisfaction on the decree for the
smaller sum.
(2) This rule shall be deemed to apply where either party is an assignee
of one of the decrees and as well in respect of judgment-debts due by the original
assignor as in respect of judgment-debts due by the assignee himself.
(3) This rule shall not be deemed to apply unless-
(a) the decree-holder in one of the suits in which the decrees
have been made is the judgment-debtor in the other and each
party fills the same character in both suits; and
(b) the sums due under the decrees are definite.
(4) The holder of a decree passed against several persons jointly and
severally may treat it as a cross-decree in relation to a decree passed against him
singly in favour of one or more of such persons.
Illustrations
(a) A holds a decree against B for Rs. 1,000. B holds a decree against
A for the payment of Rs. 1,000 in case A fails to deliver certain goods at a future
day. B cannot treat his decree as a cross-decree under this rule.
(b) A and B, co-plaintiffs, obtain a decree for Rs. 1,000 against C, and
C obtains a decree for Rs. 1,000 against B. C cannot treat his decree as a
cross-decree under this rule.
(c) A obtains a decree against B for Rs. 1,000. C, who is a trustee for
B, obtains a decree on  behalf of B against A for Rs. 1,000. B cannot treat C's
decree as a cross-decree under this rule.
(d) A, B, C, D, and E are jointly and severally liable for Rs. 1,000 under a
decree obtained by F. A obtains a decree for Rs. 100 against F singly and
applies for execution to the Court in which the joint-decree is being executed. F
may treat his joint-decree as a cross-decree under this rule.