[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/CrPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

CrPC Section 148: Local inquiry

(1) Whenever a local inquiry is necessary for the purposes of this Chapter,
4
[a
Session Judge] may depute any Magistrate subordinate to him to make the inquiry, and may furnish him with
such written instructions as may seem necessary for his guidance, and may declare by whom the whole  or  any
part of the necessary expenses of the inquiry shall be paid.
(2) The report of the person so deputed may be read as evidence in the case.
(3) Order as to costs. When any costs have been incurred by any party to a proceeding under this Chapter
5
* * * the Magistrate passing a  decision under section 145, section 146 or Section 147 may direct  by whom
such costs shall be paid, whether by such party or by any other party to the proceeding, and  whether in whole
or in part or proportion.
6
[such costs may include any expenses incurred in respect of witnesses, and of pleaders'
fees, which the Court may consider reasonable.]
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972, (12 of 1972), s.2 and Sch., for “Code of Civil Procedure”.
2
Subs. by Act 18 of 1923, s. 30, for the original section 147.
3
Omitted by ord. 37 of 2001, ss. 47-48 (w.e.f 14-08-2001).
4
Subs. by ord. 37 of 2001, s. 49 (w.e.f 14-08-2001).
5
The words “for witness, or pleader’s fees, or both”, rep. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s.31.
6
Subs. ibid., for “All costs so directed to be paid may be recovered as if they were fines”.
81
CHAPTER XIII
PREVENTIVE ACTION OF THE POLICE
149. Police  to  prevent cognizable offences. Every police-officer may interpose for the purpose of
preventing, and shall, to the best of his ability, prevent, the commission of any cognizable offence.
150. Information of design to commit such offences. Every police-officer receiving information of a
design to commit any cognizable offence shall communicate such information to the police-officer to whom  he
is subordinate, and to any other officer whose duty it is to prevent or take  cognizance  of the  commission of
any such offence.
151. Arrest to prevent such offences. A police-officer knowing of a design to commit any cognizable
offence may arrest, without orders from a Magistrate and without a warrant, the person so designing, if it
appears to such officer that the commission of the offence cannot be otherwise prevented.
152. Prevention of injury to public property. A police-officer may of his own authority interpose to
prevent any injury attempted to be committed in his view to any public  property, moveable  or immoveable, or
the removal or injury of any public landmark or buoy or other mark used for navigation.
153. Inspection of weights and measures. (1) Any officer in charge of a police-station may, without a
warrant,  enter  any  place within the limits of  such  station  for  the  purpose  of  inspecting  or  searching  for  any
weights or measures or instruments for weighing, used or kept  therein, whenever he  has reason to believe  that
there are in such place any weights, measures or instruments for weighing which are false.
(2) If he finds in such place any weights, measures or instruments for weighing which are false, he may
seize the same, and shall forthwith give information of such seizure to a Magistrate having jurisdiction.
PART V
INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGATE
CHAPTER XIV
154. Information  in  cognizable  cases. Every  information  relating  to  the commission of  a cognizable
offence if given orally to an officer in charge of a police-station, shall be reduced to writing by him or under his
direction, and be read over to the informant ; and every such information, whether given in writing or reduced
to writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it, and the substance thereof shall be entered in a
book to be kept by such officer in such form as the
1
[Provincial Government] may prescribe in this behalf [:]
2
2
[Provided  that if the  information is given by  the  woman against whom  an  offence  under  section  336B,
section 354, section 354A,  section 376 or section 509 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860)  is
alleged to have been committed or attempted, than such information shall be recorded by an investigating officer
in presence  of  a  female  police  officer  or  a  female family member  or  any  other  person  with  consent  of  the
complainant, as the case may be.
1
Subs. by A.O., 1937, for "L.G.”.
2
Added by Act XLIV of 2016,s.8.
82
Provided further that if the information, given by the woman against whom an offence under section 336B, section 354,
section 354A, section 376 or section 509 of the Pakistan Penal Code,  1860 (Act XLV of 1860) is  alleged to have been
committed or attempted, is distressed such information shall be  recorded  by  an investigating officer at residence of the
complainant or at a convenient place of the complainant's choice in presence of  a  police  officer  or  family member or any
other person with consent of the complainant, as the case may be.].
155. Information in non-cognizable cases.  (1) When information is given to an officer incharge of a police-
station of the commission within the limits of such station of a non-cognizable offence, he shall enter in a book  to  be
kept as aforesaid the substance of such information and refer the informant to the Magistrate.
(2) Investigation  into  non-cognizable  cases. No  police-officer  shall  investigate    a   non-cognizable   case
without the order of a Magistrate of the first or second class having power to try such case
1
[or send the same for trial to
the Court of Session].
(3) Any police-officer receiving such order may exercise the same powers  in respect of the  investigation (except the
power to arrest without warrant) as an officer in charge of a police-station may exercise in a cognizable case.
156. Investigation into cognizable cases._(1) Any  officer in charge  of a  police-station may,  without  the
order of a Magistrate, investigate any cognizable case which a Court having jurisdiction over the local area within the limits
of such station would have power to inquire into or try under the provisions of  Chapter  XV  relating to  the  place  of
inquiry or trial.
(2) No proceeding of a police-office in any such case shall at any stage be called in question on the  ground  that  the
case was one which such officer was not empowered under this section to investigate.
(3) Any Magistrate empowered under section 190 may order such an investigation as above-mentioned.
2
[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1), (2) or (3), no police-officer shall  investigate  an offence
under section 497 or section 498 of the Pakistan Penal Code, except upon a complaint made by the husband of  the woman,
or, in his absence,  by  some  person who had the care  of  such woman on his behalf  at the time when such offence  was
committed.].
3
[156A.  Investigation  of  offence  under  section  295  C,  Pakistan Penal  Code.-  Notwithstanding
anything contained in this Code, no police officer below the rank of a Superintendent of Police shall investigate  the  offence
against any person alleged to have been committed by him under section 295 C of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV
of 1860).
156B. Investigation against a woman accused of the offence of zina. Notwithstanding anything contained
in this Code, where a person is accused of offence of zina under the Offence  of  zina  (Enforcement  of  Hudood) Ordinance,
1979 (VII of 1979), no police officer below the rank of a Superintendent of Police shall investigate such offence nor shall
such accused be arrested without permission of the court.
Explanation.- In this section 'zina' does not include ‘zina­bil­jabr’.]
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s.2 and Sch., for “or commit the same for trail or of a Presidency Magistrate”.
2
Sub-section (4) added by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s.2 and Sch.
3
Ins. by Act. I of 05, s. 13.
83
SINDH AMENDMENT (SINDH ACT NO. IV OF 2017)
1
[156-C. Mandatory DNA Testing in Rape cases.  In Case involving the offence of rape-
a) the  DNA  testing  of  the  rape  victim  shall  be  mandatorily conducted  by a  Police  Officer
through the Laboratories recognized by Government of Sindh;
b) the DNA sample shall be collected from the raped victim within seventy-two hours from
the time of incident;
Provided  that  if  the  DNA  sample  is  not  collected  within seventy-two hours,  the
Police Officer shall make all efforts to collect and preserve the DNA sample within seven
days from the date of the rape, for the purpose of investigation of the offence of the rape.
156-D. Preservation of DNA evidence. (1) The DNA sample and DNA testing results shall
be preserved in privacy in the hospital or the Forensic Lab, as the case may be.
(2)      The  corresponding  record  of  all  DNA  sample  and  DNA  testing  results  shall  be
maintained in Central Police Office in confidentiality and under the control of an officer not below
the rank of an BS-19.
1
Inserted New Sections 156-C & 156-D, Vide, S.2 of Sindh Act No. IV of 2017, dt,22
nd
March,2017.
84
157. Procedure where cognizable offence suspected. (1) If, from information received or otherwise,
an  officer  in  charge  of  a  police-station  has  reason  to  suspect  the  commission  of  an  offence  which  he  is
empowered  under  section  156  to  investigate,  he  shall  forthwith  send  a  report  of  the  same  to  a  Magistrate
empowered to take cognizance of such offence upon a police-report, and shall proceed in person, or shall depute
one of his subordinate officers
1
[not being below such rank as the
2
[Provincial Government] may, by general
or special order, prescribe in this behalf] to proceed, to the spot, to investigate the facts and circumstances of
the case,
3
[and, if necessary, to take measures] for the discovery and arrest of the offender:
Provided as follows :-
(a) Where local investigation dispensed with. when any information as to the commission of any
such offence is given against any person by name and the case is not of a serious nature, the officer
in  charge of a police-station need not proceed in  person or depute a subordinate officer   to make
an investigation on the spot;
(b) Where police-officer in charge sees no sufficient ground for investigation. if it appears to
the  officer in charge  of  a  police-station  that  there is no  sufficient  ground  for  entering  on  an
investigation, he shall not investigate the case.
(2)  In each of  the  cases  mentioned in clauses  (a)  and  (b)  of  the  proviso  to  sub-section  (1),  the  officer in
charge of the police-station shall state in his said report his reasons for not fully complying with the requirements
of  that  sub-section,
4
[and, in the  case  mentioned in clause  (b),  such  officer  shall  also  forthwith  notify  to  the
informant, if any, in such manner as may be prescribed by the
5
[Provincial Government], the  fact that he will
not investigate the case or cause it to be investigated.]
158. Reports under  section 157 how submitted.    (1) Every report sent to a Magistrate under section
157 shall, if the
5
[Provincial Government] so directs, be submitted through such superior officer of police as
the
2
[Provincial Government], by general or special order, appoints in that behalf.
(2) Such superior officer may give such instructions to the officer in charge of the police-station as he thinks
fit, and shall, after recording such instructions on such report, transmit the same without delay to the Magistrate.
159. Power to hold investigation of preliminary inquiry. Such Magistrate, on receiving such report,
may direct an investigation or, if he thinks fit, at once proceed, or depute any Magistrate subordinate to him   to
proceed, to hold a preliminary inquiry into, or otherwise to dispose of, the case in manner provided in this Code.
160. Police-officer's  power  to  require  attendance  of  witnesses. Any  police-officer  making  an
investigation under this Chapter may, by order in writing, require the attendance before  himself  of  any person
being within the limits of his own or any adjoining station who, from the information given or otherwise, appears
to be acquainted with the circumstances of the case; and such person shall attend as so required.
1
Ins. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 32.
2
Subs. by A.O., 1937, for “L.G”.
3
Subs. by Act 18 of 1923, s. 32, for “and to take such measures as may be necessary”.
4
Ins. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923). S. 32.
5
Subs. by A.O., 1937, for “L.G”.
85
161. Examination  of witnesses by police. (1) Any police-officer making an investigation under this
Chapter
1
[or any police-officer not below such rank as the
2
[Provincial Government] may, by general or special
order,  prescribe in this  behalf,  acting  on  the  requisition  of  such  officer]  may  examine  orally  any    person
supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case
3
[:]
3
[Provided that a statement of a woman against whom an offence under section 336B, section 354,  section
354A, section 376 or section 509 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860) is alleged to have been
committed or attempted, shall be recorded by an investigating officer in presence of a female  police officer or
a female family member or other person of her choice.].
(2)  Such  person  shall  be  bound  to  answer  all  questions  relating  to  such  case  put  to  him  by  such  officer,
other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a
penalty or forfeiture.
4
[(3) The police-officer may reduce into writing any statement made to him in the course of an examination
under this section, and if he does so he shall make a separate record of the statement, of each such person whose
statement he records.]
5
[161A. Legal representation of victim of rape, etc.
(1) Where an offence under section 354A,
section 376, section 377 or section 377B of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860) has been
committed or attempted to be committed, the police officer after recording the information under section
154 shall inform the victim, against whom such offences have been committed or attempted  to  be
committed, of his right to legal representation.
(2) If the victim under sub-section (1) requires free legal aid the police officer shall provide him the list   of
lawyers maintained by the Provincial Bar Councils for this purpose.].