[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 462: Punishment  for  same  offence  when  committed  by  person  entrusted  with  custody

Whoever, being entrusted with any closed receptacle which contains or which he believes to contain
property,  without  having  authority  to  open  the  same, dishonestly, or with intent  to commit mischief,
breaks open or unfastens that receptacle, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
1
[CHAPTER XVII A]
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO OIL AND GAS ETC
462A. Definition.— In this chapter, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context:
(a)  "distribution"   means   the   activity   of   transporting   petroleum   through   pipelines   and
associated facilities. In case of natural gas, distribution means the activity of transporting
natural gas through  pipelines  and  associated  facility  at  a  pressure  which would not
ordinarily be expected to exceed three hundred per square inch gauge (psig) or such pressure
as the relevant Regulatory Authority may prescribe from time to time;
(b) "facility"  includes  Liquefied  Petroleum  Gas  (LPG)  processing  facility  or  compression
facility, natural gas or LPG testing facility, natural gas storage facility, Liquefied Natural
Gas (LNG) processing facility or crude oil and refined oil products storage facility, repeater
station  or  compression  station  other  than  compression  system installed at  Compressed
Natural Gas (CNG) Station;
(c)  "gas  meter"  means  an  instrument  which  measures gas delivered  to  consumer  for
consumption;
(d) "gas regulator" means a regulator to control the pressure of gas;
(e) "installation"  means  all  facilities  used in loading,  unloading,  reloading,  transmission and
distribution of petroleum, including equipment, terminals, storage tanks, pipelines and port
facilities;
(f) "meter index" means a "counter in" in a gas meter for recording the volume of gas passed
through the gas meter at line condition;
(g)  "person"   includes   any individual or   any company, firm   or   corporation   whether
incorporated or not, or a public servant or an employee of any oil and gas company;
1
Ins. by Act XX of 2011, s. 2.
(h) "petroleum" means oil, crude oil, refined oil products, natural gas, LPG, Air Mix LPG, LNG
and CNG;
(i) "pipeline" means any  pipe or any system or  arrangement of pipes wholly within Pakistan
including offshore area which transports petroleum and includes all equipment of any kind
used for the purpose of, or in connection with, or incidental to, the operation of a pipeline
in transporting or handling of petroleum;
(j) "tampering" includes interfering or creating hindrance in flow or metering of petroleum by
unauthorized  entry  into  metering  system  or transmission and  distribution lines either  by
breaking the seals or damaging or destructing the same or in any manner interfering with
the meter or interfering with its original condition;
(k) "transmission" means the activity of transporting natural gas through pipelines and other
facilities at a pressure of not less than three hundred psig or such pressure as the relevant
regulatory Authority may prescribe from time to time; and
(l) "transportation"  means  an  activity  of  transporting oil through  pipelines  and  associated
facilities where the pipelines are an integral part of a refinery, facility or gathering pipelines.
462B. Tampering with petroleum pipelines, etc. (1) Any person who wilfully does tampering
or  attempts  to  do  tampering  or  abets  in  tampering  with  a  facility,  installation  or  main  pipeline  for
transmission  or  transportation,  as  the  case  may  be,  of  petroleum,  is  said  to  commit  tampering  with
petroleum pipelines.
(2) Any person who commits or abets in tampering with petroleum pipelines for the purpose of,
(a) theft of petroleum; or
(b) disrupting supply of petroleum,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to fourteen years but shall not be  less
than seven years and with fine which may extend to ten million rupees.
462C. Tampering with auxiliary or distribution pipelines of petroleum.— (1) Any person who
wilfully does  tampering  or  attempts  to  do  tampering  or  abets in tampering with any auxiliary or
distribution pipeline of petroleum not being a main transmission and transportation pipeline but includes
a distribution system, distribution pipeline or any other related system and equipment, as the case may
be, of petroleum is said to commit tampering with auxiliary or distribution pipelines of petroleum.
(2) Any  person  who commits or  abets in tampering with auxiliary  or  distribution pipeline or
petroleum for the purpose of,
(a) theft of petroleum; or
(b) disrupting supply of petroleum,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to ten years but shall not be less than
five years and with fine which may extend to three million rupees.
462D. Tampering with gas meter by domestic consumer, etc. Any person or individual being
the domestic consumer who does tampering or abets in tampering with any gas meter regulator, meter
index or gas connection or any other related system and equipments, whether to commit theft of gas or
for the purpose of unauthorized distribution or supply of gas shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which  may extend to six months or fine which may extend to  one hundred thousand  rupees or
both.
462E. Tampering with gas meter by Industrial or commercial consumer, etc. Any person or
individual being industrial or commercial consumer who does tampering or abets in tampering with any
gas meter, regulator, meter index or gas connection or any other related system and equipments, whether
to commit theft of gas or for the purpose of unauthorized distribution or supply of gas shall be punished
with imprisonment which may extend to ten years but shall not be less than five years or fine which
may extend to five million rupees or both.
462F. Damaging or destructing the transmission or transportation lines, etc. Any person
who damages or destructs any transmission or transportation lines by an act of subversion by explosive
material or in another manner so as to disrupt the supply of petroleum shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment which may extend to fourteen years but shall not be less than seven years and with fine
which shall not be less than one million rupees.