[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 337O: Wali in case of hurt

(a) the victim:
In the case of hurt the wali shall be––
Provided that, if the victim is a minor or insane, his right of qisas shall be exercised by his
father or paternal grandfather, how­high­so­ever ;
(b) the heirs of the victim, if the later dies before the execution of qisas ; and
(c) the Government, in the absence of the victim or the heirs of the victim.
337P. Execution of qisas for hurt. (1) Qisas shall be executed in the public by an authorised
medical officer who shall before such execution examine the offender and take due care so as to ensure
that the execution of qisas does not cause the death of the offender or exceed the hurt caused by him
to the victim.
(2) The wali shall  be  present  at  the time of  execution  and if the wali or his representative is not
present, after having been informed of the
1
Added, Subs & Ins by Act I of 05, ss.10 &11.
date, time and place by the court an officer authorised by the court in this behalf shall give permission
for the execution of qisas.
(3) If the convict is a  woman who is pregnant, the court may, in consultation with an authorised
medical officer, postpone the execution of qisas up to a period of two years after the birth of the child
and during this period she may be released on bail on furnishing of security to the satisfaction of the
court or, if she is not so released, shall be dealt with as if sentenced to simple imprisonment.
337Q. Arsh for single organs. The arsh for causing itlaf of an organ which is found singly in a
human body shall be equivalent to the value of diyat.
Explanation.
body.
Nose and tongue are included in the organs which are found singly in a human
337R. Arsh for organs in pairs. The arsh for causing itlaf of organs found in a human body in
pairs shall be equivalent to the value of diyat and if itlaf is caused to one of such organs the amount
of arsh shall be one-half of the diyat :
Provided that, where the victim has only one such organ or his other organ is missing or has already
become incapacitated the arsh for causing itlaf of the existing or capable organ shall be equal to the
value of diyat.
Explanation. Hands, feet, eyes, lips and breasts are included in the organs which are found in a
human body in pairs.