[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 356: Assault  or  criminal  force  in  attempt  to  commit  theft  of  property  carried  by  a  person

Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person in attempting to commit theft on any property which that
person is then wearing or carrying shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
357. Assault or criminal force in attempt wrongfully to confine a person. Whoever assaults or
uses criminal force  to any person,  in attempting wrongfully to confine that person,  shall  be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to
3
[three thousand rupees], or with both.
1
Subs. by ord. 86 of 02, S.2& Sch.I
2
Ins. by Ord. XXIV of 1984, s.2.
3
Subs. by Ord. No. 86 of 2002, s.2 and Sch-I.
358. Assault or criminal force on grave provocation. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to
any  person  on  grave  and  sudden  provocation given by  that  person,  shall  be  punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or with fine which may extend to
1
[six hundred
rupees], or with both.
Explanation. The last section is subject to the same Explanation as section 352.
Of Kidnapping, Abduction, Slavery and Forced Labour
359. Kidnapping. Kidnapping is of two kinds: kidnapping from
2
[Pakistan], and kidnapping from
lawful guardianship.
360. Kidnapping from Pakistan. Whoever conveys any person beyond the limits of
2
[Pakistan]
without the consent of that person, or of some person legally authorised to consent on behalf of that
person, is said to kidnap that person from
2
[Pakistan].
361. Kidnapping from lawful guardianship. Whoever takes or entices any minor under fourteen
years of age if a male, or under sixteen years of age if a female, or any person of unsound mind, out of
the keeping of the lawful guardian of such minor or person of unsound mind, without the consent of
such guardian, is said to kidnap such minor or person from lawful guardianship.
Explanation. The words “lawful guardian” in this section include any person lawfully entrusted
with the care or custody of such minor or other person.
Exception. This section does not extend to the act of any person who in good faith believes
himself to be the father of an illegitimate child, or who in good faith believes himself to be entitled to
the lawful custody of such child, unless such act is committed for an immoral or unlawful purpose.
362. Abduction. Whoever by force compels, or by any deceitful means induces, any person to go
from any place, is said to abduct that person.
363. Punishments for kidnapping. Whoever kidnaps any person from
2
[Pakistan] or from lawful
guardianship, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
364. Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder. Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in
order  that  such  person  may  be  murdered  or  may  be  so  disposed  of  as  to  be  put in danger  of  being
murdered, shall be punished with
3
[imprisonment for life] or rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Illustrations
(a) A kidnaps Z from
2
[Pakistan], intending or knowing it to be likely that Z may be sacrificed
to an idol. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
1
Subs. by Ord. No. 86 of 2002, s.2 and Sch-I.
2
Subs. by the Central Laws (Statue Reform) Ordinance, 1960 (21 of 1960), s. 3 and 2
nd
Sch. (w.e.f. 14
th
October, 1955), for “the Provinces and
the Capital of the Federation” which had been subs. by A. O., 1949, Arts. 3(2) ad 4, for “British India”.
3
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
(b) A forcibly carries or entices B away from his home in order that B may be murdered. A has
committed the offence defined in this section.
1
[364A. Kidnapping or abducting a person under the age of
2
[fourteen]. Whoever kidnaps or
abducts any person under the age of
2
[fourteen] in order that such person may be murdered or subjected
to grievous hurt, or slavery, or to the lust of any person or may be so disposed of as to be put in danger
of being murdered or subjected to grievous hurt, or slavery, or to the lust of any person shall be punished
with death or with
3
[imprisonment for life] or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend
to fourteen years and shall not be less than seven years.]