[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://khalidzafar.com/wp-content/files_mf/1527158791QanuneShahadatOrder1984.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-14

QSO Section 125: Burden of proof as to relationship in the cases of partners, landlord and tenant, principal

and agent. When the question is whether persons are partners, landlord and tenant, or principal
and agent, and it has been shown that they have been acting as such, the burden of proving
that they do not stand, or have ceased to stand, to each other in those relationships
respectively, is on the person who affirms it.
126. Burden of proof as to ownership. When the question is whether any person is owner of
anything of which he is shown to be in possession, the burden of proving that he is not the
owner is on the person who affirms that he is not the owner.
127. Proof good faith in transactions where one party is in relation of active confidence. When
there is a question as to the good faith of a transaction between parties, one of whom stands to
the other in a position of active confidence, the burden of proving the good faith of the
transaction is on the party who is in a position of active confidence.
Illustrations
(a) The good faith of a sale by a client to an advocate is in question in a suit brought by the
client. The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the advocate.
(b) The good faith of a sale by a son just come of age to a father is in question in a suit
brought by the son. The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the father.
128. Birth during marriage conclusive proof of legitimacy. (1) The fact that any person was born
during the continuance of a valid marriage between his mother and any man and not earlier,
that the expiration of six lunar months from the date of the marriage or within two years after
its dissolution, the mother remaining unmarried, shall be conclusive proof that he is the
legitimate child of that man, unless–
(a) the husband had refused, or refuses, to own the child; or
(b) the child was born after the expiration of six lunar months from the date or which the
woman had accepted that the period of iddat had come to an end.
(2) Nothing contained in clause (1) shall apply to a non-Muslim if it is inconsistent with his faith.
129. Court may presume existence of certain facts. The Court may presume the existence of
any fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being had to the common course to
natural events, human conduct and public and private business, in their relation to the facts of
the particular case.
Illustrations
The Court may presume—
(a) that a man who is in possession of stolen good soon after the theft is either the thief or has
received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for his possession;
(b) that an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in material particulars;
(c) that a bill of exchange, accepted or endorsed, was accepted or endorsed for good
consideration;
(d) that a thing or state of things which has been shown to be in existence within a period
shorter than that within which such things or states of thins usually cease to exist, is still in
existence;
(e) that judicial and official acts have been regularly performed;
(f) that the common course of business has been followed in particular cases;
(g) that evidence which could be and is not produced would, if produced, be unfavourable to
the person who withholds it;
(h) that, if a man refuses to answer a question which he is not compelled to answer by law, the
answer, if given, would be unfavourable to him;
(i) that when a document creating an obligation is in the hands of the obliger, the obligation
has been discharged.
But the Court shall also have regard to such facts as the following, in considering whether such
maxims do or do not apply to the particular case before it;
as to illustration (a). A shopkeeper has in his till a marked rupee soon after it was stolen, and
cannot account for its possession specifically, but is continually receiving rupees in the course of
his business;
as to illustration (b). A, person of the highest character, is tried for causing a man‘s death by an
act of negligence in arranging certain machinery, B, a person of equally good character, who
also took part in the arrangement, describes precisely what was done, and admits and explains
the common carelessness of A and himself;
as to illustration (b). A crime is committed by several persons. A, B and C, three of the
criminals, are captured on the shop and kept apart from each other. Each gives an account of
the crime implicating D, and the accounts corroborate each other in such a manner as to render
previous concert highly improbable;
as to illustration (c). A, the drawer of a bill of exchange, was a man of business, B, the
acceptor, was a young and ignorant person, completely under A‘s influence;
as to illustration (d). It is proved that a river ran in a certain course five years ago, but it is
known that there have been floods since that time which might change its course;
as to illustration (e). A judicial act, the regularity of which is in question, was performed under
exceptional circumstances;
as to illustration (f). The question is, whether a letter was received. It is shown to have been
posted, but the usual course of the post was interrupted by disturbances;
as to illustration (g). A man refuses to produce a document which would bear on a contract of
small importance on which he is used, but which might also injure the feelings and reputation
of his family;
as to illustration (h). A man refuses to answer a question which he is not compelled by law to
answer, but the answer to it might cause loss to him in matters unconnected with the matter in
relation to which it is asked;
as to illustration (i). A bond is in possession of the obligor, but the circumstances of the case
are such that he may have stolen it.
COMMENTARY
Summons sent in properly addressed and prepaid envelopes. Presumption. Presumption under
Art. 129 (e), Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 and S. 27, General Clauses Act, 1897, would be
that summons in question, were duly served on defendants by registered post. Such
presumption although was rebuttable but nothing was brought on record to rebut such
presumption.2
Official acts are presumed to have been performed with regularity.3
Presumption. Sale of land. Question that the seller of land was a person of unsound mind. Trial
Court and Appellate Court had noted that although sale-deed was presented for registration on
2nd January, 1964 but it was registered only after 18th July, 1964 when it was represented.
Trial Court had also taken into account interpolation made in the endorsement which was
evident on the face of the document. Written statement showed that medical certificate was
produced by appellants, before the Sub-Registrar at the time of registration of sale-deed but
the said certificate had not been produced but was withheld by appellants. Courts below, held,
were justified to draw presumption against the appellants.4
Registered document. Presumption. Presumption of truth is attached to registered document.5
Evidence withheld by a party. Held: Inference can be drawn that such evidence should have
adversely affected party with-holding evidence.6
CHAPTER X
OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
130. Order of production and examination of witnesses. The order in which witnesses are
produced and examined shall be regulated by the law and practice for the time being relating to
civil and criminal procedure respectively, and, in the absence of any such law, by the discretion
of the Court.
131. Judge to decide as to admissibility of evidence. (1) When either party proposes to give
evidence of any fact, the Judge may ask the party proposing to give the evidence in what
manner the alleged fact, if proved, would be relevant, and the Judge shall admit the evidence if
he thinks that the fact, if proved, would be relevant and not otherwise.
(2) If the fact proposed to be proved is one of which evidence is admissible only upon proof of
some other fact, such last-mentioned fact must be proved before evidence is given of the fact
first-mentioned, unless the party undertakes to give proof of such fact, and the Court is
satisfied with such undertaking.
(3) If the relevancy of the one alleged fact depends upon another alleged fact being first
proved, the Judge may, in his discretion, either permit evidence of the first fact to be given
before the second fact is proved, or require evidence to be given of the second fact before
evidence is given of the first fact.
Illustrations
(a) It is proposed to prove a statement about a relevant fact by a person alleged to be dead,
which statement is relevant under Article 46.
The fact that the person is dead must be proved by the person proposing to prove the
statement, before evidence is given of the statement.
(b) It is proposed to prove, by a copy, the contents of a document said to be lost.
The fact that the original is lost must be proved by the person proposing to produce the copy,
before the copy is produced.
(c) A is accused of receiving stolen property knowing it to have been stolen.
It is proposed to prove that he denied the possession of the property.
The relevancy of the denial depends on the identity of the property.
The Court may in its discretion, either require the property to be identified before the denial of
the possession is proved or permit the denial of possession to be proved before the property is
identified.
(d) It is proposed to prove a fact (A) which is said to have been the cause or effect of a fact-in-
issue. There are several intermediate facts (B, C and D) which must be shown to exist before
the fact (A) can be regarded as the cause or effect of the fact-in-issue. The Court may either
permit A to be proved before B, C or D is proved, or may require proof of B, C and D before
permitting proof of A.
132. Examination-in-chief, etc. (1) The examination of a witness by the party who calls him
shall be called his examination-in-chief.
(2) The examination of a witness by the adverse party shall be called his cross-examination.
(3) The examination of a witness, subsequent to the cross-examination by the party who called
him, shall be called his re-examination.
133. Order of examinations. (1) Witnesses shall be first examined-in-chief, then (if the adverse
party so desires) cross-examined, then (if the party calling him so desires) re-examined.
(2) The examination and cross-examination must relate to relevant facts but the cross-
examination need not be confined to the facts to which the witness testified on his examination-
in-chief.
(3) The re-examination shall be directed to the explanation of matters referred to in cross-
examination; and if new matter is, by permission of the Court, introduced in re-examination,
the adverse party may further cross-examine that matter.
COMMENTARY
Witness can be re-examined with permission of Court in case any ambiguity crops up during
cross-examination which needs clarification or elucidation.6a
Order of examination as prescribed in Arts. 133, 150 is meant to elicit true facts from the
witness, the party at whose instance the witness has been produced would of course examine
and as such put forth its case. Thereafter, to test the credibility or veracity of the witness, the
adverse party has been granted the right of cross-examining him. If some ambiguity or
confusion has arisen during cross-examination, the party can re-examine the witness and if
some new fact has been introduced then the adverse party can cross-examine him further.6b
The examination-in-chief, cross-examination and re-examination all make one statement. The
whole exercise is undertaken to extort truth so that complete justice may be dispensed. During
course of statement, if a witness produced by prosecution deviates from true facts and the
same are being suppressed in order to extend concession or due to some other ulterior motive,
the Court can permit the party to cross-examine his own witness.6c
Re-examination of a witness. It is possible that during the course of re-examination a witness
while clarifying or elucidating a fact may suppress the truth or state something which appears
to be palpably false or self-contradictory or for some allied reason, then permission can be
sought from Court to cross-examine that witness. In such case Court may grant permission to
cross-examine the witness in the interest of justice.7
134. Cross-examination of person called to produce a document. A person summoned to
produce a document does not become a witness by the mere fact that he produces it and
cannot be cross-examined unless and until he is called as a witness.
135. Witnesses to character. Witnesses to character may be cross-examined and re-examined.
136. Leading questions. Any question suggesting to answer which the person putting it wishes
or expects to receive is called a leading question.
137. When leading questions must not be asked. (1) Leading questions must not, if objected to
by the adverse party, be asked in an examination-in-chief, or in a re-examination, except with
the permission of the Court.
(2) The Court shall permit leading questions as to matters which are introductory or
undisputed; or which have, in its opinion been already sufficiently proved.
138. When leading questions may be asked. Leading questions may be asked in cross-
examination.
139. Evidence as to matters in writing. Any witness may be asked, whilst under examination,
whether any contract, grant or other disposition of property, as to which he is giving evidence,
was not contained in a document, and if he says that it was, or if he is about to make any
statement as to the contents of any documents, which, in the opinion of the Court, ought to be
produced, the adverse party may object to such evidence being given until such document is
produced, or until facts have been proved which entitle that party who called the witness to
give secondary evidence of it.
Explanation. A witness may give oral evidence of statement made by other persons about the
contents of documents if such statements are in themselves relevant facts.
Illustration
The question is, whether A assaulted B.
C deposes that he heard A say to D ―B wrote a letter accusing me of theft. And I will be
revenged on him‖. This statement is relevant, as showing A‘s motive for the assault, and
evidence may be given of it, though no other evidence is given about the letter.
140. Cross-examination as to previous statements in writing. A witness may be cross-examined
as to previous statements made by him in writing or reduced into writing, and relevant to
matters in question, without such writing being shown to him, or being proved; but, if it is
intended to contradict him by the writing, his attention must, before the writing can be proved,
be called to those parts of it which are to be used for the purpose of contradicting him.
COMMENTARY
State counsel unauthorized to cross-examine his own witness with leave of Court if witness
does not support prosecution during trial. If, however, permission under Art. 140 is not sought
and witness was not got declared hostile, Court is bound to give credit to statement of witness
and give whatever benefit from evidence of such witness goes to accused. Benefit of such
evidence, however, would not be extended to all accused facing trial, but would be extended
only to accused in whose favour such evidence has been given. For this reason alone,
prosecution case against other accused persons shall not be disbelieved.9
141. Questions lawful in cross-examination. When a witness cross-examined, he may, in
addition to the questions hereinbefore referred to, be asked any questions which tend–
(1) to test his veracity,
(2) to discover who he is and what is his position in life, or
(3) to shake his credit, by injuring his character, although the answer to such question might
tend directly or indirectly to criminate him or might expose or tend directly or indirectly to
expose him to a penalty or forfeiture.
142. When witness to be compelled to answer. If any such question relates to a matter relevant
to the suit or proceeding, the provisions of Article 15 shall apply thereto.
143. Court to decide when question shall be asked and when witness compelled to answer. If
any such question relates to a matter not relevant to the suit or proceeding, except insofar as it
affects the credit of the witness by injuring his character, the Court shall decide whether or not
the witness shall be compelled to answer it, and may, if it thinks fit, warn the witness that he is
not obliged to answer it. In exercising its discretion, the Court shall have regard to the following
considerations:–
(1) such questions are proper if they are of such a nature that the truth of the imputation
conveyed by them would seriously affect the opinion of the Court as to the credibility of the
witness on the matter to which he testified;
(2) such questions are improper if the imputation which they convey relates to matters so
remote in time, or of such a character, that the truth of the imputation would not affect, or
would affect in slight degree, the opinion of the Court as to the credibility of the witness on the
matter to which he testified;
(3) such questions are improper if there is a great disproportion between the importance of the
imputation made against the witness‘s character and the importance of his evidence;
(4) the Court may, if it sees fit, draw, from the witness‘s refusal to answer, the inference that
the answer if given would be unfavourable.
144. Question not to be asked without reasonable grounds. No such question as is referred to
in Article 143 ought to be asked, unless the person asking it has reasonable grounds for
thinking that the imputation which it conveys is well founded.
Illustrations
(a) An advocate is instructed by an attorney that an important witness is a dakait. This is a
reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he is a dakait.
(b) An advocate is informed by a person in Court that an important witness is a dakait. The
informant, on being questioned by the advocate, given satisfactory reasons for his statement.
This is reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he is a dakait.
(c) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, is asked at random whether he is a dakait.
There are here no reasonable grounds for the question.
(d) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, being questioned as to his mode of life and
means of living, gives unsatisfactory answers. This may be a reasonable ground for asking him
if he is a dakait.
145. Procedure of Court in case of question being asked without reasonable grounds. If the
Court is of opinion that any such question was asked without reasonable grounds, it may, if it
was asked by any advocate, report the circumstances of the case to the High Court or other
authority to which such advocate is subject in the exercise of his profession.
146. Indecent and scandalous question. The Court may forbid any question or inquiries which it
regards as indecent or scandalous, although such questions or inquiries may have some bearing
on the questions, before the Court, unless they relate to facts in issue, or to matters necessary
to be known in order to determine whether on not the facts in issue existed.
147. Procedure of Court in cases of defamation, libel and slanders. When a person is
prosecuted or sued for making or publishing an imputation of a defamatory, libelous or
slanderous nature, the Court shall, not, before it has recorded its findings on the issues whether
such person did make or publish such imputation, and whether such imputation is true, permit
any question to be put to any witness for the purpose of injuring the character of the person in
respect of whom such imputation has, or is alleged to have, been made, or any other person,
whether dead or alive, in whom he is interested, except insofar as any such question may the
necessary for the purpose of determining the truth of the imputations alleged to have been
made or published.
148. Questions intended to insult or annoy. The Court shall forbid any question which appears
to it to be intended to insult or annoy; or which, though proper in itself, appears to the Court
needlessly offensive in form.
149. Exclusion of evidence to contradict answers to questions testing veracity. When a witness
has been asked and has answered any question which is relevant to the inquiry only insofar as
it tends to shake his credit by injuring his character, no evidence shall be given to contradict
him; but, if he answers falsely, he may afterwards be charged with giving false evidence.
Exception 1. If a witness is asked whether he has been previously convicted of nay crime denies
it, evidence may be given of his previous conviction.
Exception 2. If a witness is asked any question tending to impeach his impartiality and answers
it by denying the facts suggested, he may be contradicted.
Illustrations
(a) A claim against an underwriter is resisted on the ground of fraud.
The claimant is asked whether, in a former transaction, he had not made a fraudulent claim. He
denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that he did make such a claim.
The evidence is inadmissible.
(b) A witness is asked whether he was not dismissed from a situation for dishonesty.
He denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that he was dismissed for dishonesty.
The evidence is not admissible.
(c) A affirms that on a certain day he saw B at Lahore.
A is asked whether he himself was not on that day at Faisalabad. He denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that A was on that day at Faisalabad.
The evidence is admissible, not as contradicting A on a fact which effects his credit, but as
contradicting the alleged fact that B was seen on the day in question in Lahore.
In each of these cases the witness might, if his denial was false, be charged with giving false
evidence.
(d) A is asked whether his family has not had a blood-feud with the family of B against whom
he gives evidence.
He denies it. He may be contradicted on the ground that the question tends to impeach his
impartiality.
150. Question by party to his own witness. The Court may, in its discretion, permit the person
who calls a witness to put any questions to him which might be put in cross-examination by the
adverse party.
151. Impeaching credit of witness. The credit of a witness may be impeached in the following
ways by the adverse party, or, with the consent of the Court, by the party who calls him:
(1) by the evidence of persons who testify that they, from their knowledge of the witness,
believe him to be unworthy of credit;
(2) by proof that the witness has been bribed, or has accepted the offer of a bribe, or has
received any other corrupt inducement to give his evidence;
(3) by proof of former statements inconsistent with any part of his evidence which is liable to
be contradicted;
(4) when a man is prosecuted for rape or an attempt to ravish, it may be shown that the
prosecutrix was of generally immoral character.
Explanation. A witness declaring another witness to be unworthy of credit may not, upon his
examination-in-chief, give reasons for his belief, but he may be asked his reasons in cross-
examination, and the answers which he gives cannot be contradicted, though, if they are false,
he may afterwards be charged with giving false evidence.
Illustrations
(a) A sues B for the price of goods sold and delivered to B, C says that A delivered the goods to
B.
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, he said that he had not delivered the
goods to B.
The evidence is admissible.
(b) A is indicated for the murder of B.
C says that B, when dying, declared that A had given B the wound of which he died.
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, C said that the wound was not given
by A or in his presence.
The evidence is admissible.
152. Questions tending to corroborate evidence of relevant fact admissible. When a witness
whom it is intended to corroborate gives evidence of any relevant fact, he may be questioned
as to any other circumstances which he observed at or near to the time or place at which such
relevant fact occurred if the Court is of opinion that such circumstances, if proved, would
corroborate the testimony of the witness as to the relevant fact which he testifies.
Illustration
A, an accomplice, gives an account of robbery in which he took part. He describes various
incidents unconnected with the robbery which occurred on his way to and from the place where
it was committed.
Independent evidence of these facts may be given in order to corroborate his evidence as to
the robbery itself.