[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 162: Taking gratification, in order, by corrupt or illegal means to influence public servant

Whoever accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept, or attempts to obtain, from any person, for himself or
for any other person, any gratification whatever as a motive or reward for inducing, by corrupt or illegal
means, any public servant to do or to forbear to do any official act, or in the exercise of the official
functions of such public servant to show favour or disfavour to any person, or to render or attempt to
render any service or disservice to any person
6
[with the
7
[Federal] or any Provincial Government
l
Subs. by the Criminal Law Amdt. Act, 1953 (37 of 1953), s. 2, for “government, which he serves”.
2
Added by the Prevention of Corruption Laws (Amdt.) Act, 1977 (13 of 1977). s. 2 and Sch.
3
Subs. by A. O.,1961 Art. 2 and Sch., for “Resident” (w.e.f. 23rd March, 1956).
4
Subs. ibid., for “subsidiary” (w.e.f. 23rd March, 1956).
5
Subs. ibid., for “British Government” (w.e.f. 23rd March, 1956).
6
Subs. by A. O., 1937, for “with the Legislative or Executive G. of I., or with the Govt. of any Presidency, or with any Lieutenant­Governor”.
7
Subs. by the Federal Adaptation of Laws Order, 1975 (P.O. No. 4 of 1975), Art. 2 and Table for “Central”.
or  Legislature],  or with any public servant,  as  such,  shall  be  punished with  imprisonment of  either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
163. Taking  gratification,  for  exercise  of  personal  influence  with  public  servant. Whoever
accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain, from any person, for himself or for any
other person, any gratification whatever, as a motive or reward for inducing, by the exercise of personal
influence, any public servant to do or to forbear to do any official act, or in the exercise of the official
functions of such public servant to show favour or disfavour to any person, or to render or attempt to
render any service or disservice to any person
l
[with the
2
[Federal] or any Provincial Government or
Legislature], or with any public servant, as such, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration
An advocate who receives a fee for arguing a case before a Judge ; a person who receives pay for
arranging and correcting a memorial addressed to Government, setting forth the services and claims of
the memorialist ; a paid agent for a condemned criminal, who lays before the Government
statements tending to show that the condemnation was unjust, as
they do not exercise or profess to exercise personal influence.
are not within this section, inasmuch