[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/CrPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

CrPC Section 509: Deposition  of  medical  witness

_
(1) The deposition  of  a Civil Surgeon or  other  medical  witness,
taken and attested by a Magistrate in the presence of the  accused, or taken on commission  under Chapter  XL,
may be given in evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code,  although  the deponent is
not called as a witness.
(2) Power  to  summon  medical  witness. The  Court  may,  if  it  thinks  fit,  summon  and  examine  such
deponent as to the subject matter of his deposition.
1
[510.  Report  of  Chemical  Examiner,  Serologist  etc. Any document purporting to be a report,
under the hand of any Chemical Examiner or Assistant Chemical Examiner to Government or any Serologist,
finger-print expert  or  fire-arm  expert
5
[or  the  Chemist  or  the  Pharmacist  or  the  Forensic  Scientist  or  Hand-
writing expert] appointed  by  Government,
2
[or  of  the  Chief Chemist of  the  Pakistan  Security  Printing
Corporation, Limited.] upon any matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination or analysis and report
in  the course of any proceeding under this Code, may,  without calling him as a witness,  be used as evidence
in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code:
Provided that the Court may,
3
[if it considers necessary in the interest of justice], summon and examine
the person by whom such report has been made.].
511. Previous conviction or acquittal how proved. In any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this
Code, a previous conviction or acquittal may be proved, in addition to any other mode provided by any law for
the time being in force-
(a) by an extract certified under the hand of the  officer having the  custody of the  records of the  Court in
which such conviction or acquittal was had to be a copy of the sentence or the order ; or
(b) in case  of  a  conviction,  either  by  a  certificate signed by  the  officer incharge of  the jail in which  the
punishment or any part thereof was inflicted, or  by production of the warrant of commitment under
which the punishment was suffered ;
together with, in each of such cases, evidence as to the identity of the accused person with the person so
convicted or acquitted.
512.  Record  of  evidence  in  absence  of  accused._(1)  If it is proved  that  an  accused  person  has
absconded, and that there is no immediate prospect of arresting him, the Court competent to try or
4
[send for
trial  to  the  Court  of Session or High Court]  such  person  for  the  offence  complained  of may, in his absence,
examine the witnesses (if  any) produced on behalf of the  prosecution, and record their depositions. Any  such
deposition may, on the arrest of such person, be given in evidence against  him on the inquiry into, or  trial for,
the offence with which he is charged, if the deponent is dead or incapable of giving evidence or his attendance
cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expanse or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of
the case, would be unreasonable.
1
Subs. by Ordinance 12 of 1972, s.2 and Sch., for “section 510”.
2
Ins. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1983 (5 of 1983), s.2.
3
Subs by the Law Reforms (Amdt.) Act, 1976 (21 of 1976), s.2 and Sch, for “and shall, if so. requested by any party to such inquiry, trial or “proceeding,”, (w.e.f. 18­4­76).
4
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s.2 and Sch., for “commit for trail”.
5
Words Inserted by Federal Act No. XXXIII of 2022 S. 2 dated 18.12.2022
Page 180 of 319
(2) Record of evidence when offender unknown. If it appears that an offence punishable with death
or
1
[imprisonment for life] has been committed by some person or persons unknown, the High Court may direct
that any Magistrate of the first class shall hold an inquiry and examine any witnesses who can give evidence
concerning  the  offence.  Any  depositions  so  taken  may  be given in evidence against any  person  who is
subsequently accused of the offence, if the deponent is dead or incapable of giving evidence or beyond the limits
of
2
[Pakistan].
CHAPTER XLII
PROVISIONS AS TO BONDS
513. Deposit instead of recognizance. When any person is  required by any Court  or officer to execute
a bond, with or without sureties, such Court or officer may, except in the case of a bond for good behaviour,
permit him to deposit a sum of money or Government promissory notes to such amount as the Court or  officer
may fix, in lieu of executing such bond.
3