[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/CrPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

CrPC Section 138: Procedure where he claims Jury

jury, the Magistrate shall-
(1) On receiving an application under section 135 to appoint a
(a) forthwith appoint a jury consisting of an uneven number of persons not less than five, of whom the
foreman and one-half of the remaining members shall be nominated by such Magistrate, and the
other members by the applicant ;
(b) summon such foreman and members to attend at such place and time as the Magistrate thinks fit
; and
(c) fix a time within which they are to return their verdict.
(2) The time so fixed may, for good cause shown, be extended by the Magistrate.
139. Procedure where jury finds Magistrate's order to be reasonable. (1) If the jury or a majority
of the jurors find that the order of the Magistrate is reasonable and proper as originally made, or subject to a
modification  which  the  Magistrate  accepts,  the  Magistrate  shall  make  the  order  absolute,  subject  to  such
modification (if any).
(2) In other cases no further proceedings shall be taken under this Chapter.
3
[139A. Procedure where existence of public right is denied.
(1) Where an order is made under
section 133 for the purpose of preventing obstruction, nuisance or danger to the public in  the  use  of any  way,
river, channel or place, the Magistrate shall, on the appearance before him of the person against whom  the order
was made, question him as to whether he denies the existence of any public right in respect of the way, river,
channel or place, and if he does so, the Magistrate shall, before proceeding under section 137 or section 138,
inquire into the matter.
1
Ins. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 25.
2
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s.2 and Sch., for “as in a summons case”.
3
S.139A ins. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s.26.
75
(2) If in such inquiry the Magistrate finds that there is any reliable evidence in support of such denial, he
shall stay the proceedings until the matter of the existence of such right has been decided by a competent  Civil
Court ; and, if he finds that there is no such evidence, he shall proceed as laid down in section 137 or section
138, as the case may require.
(3) A  person  who  has,  on  being  questioned  by  the  Magistrate  under  sub-section  (1)  failed  to  deny  the
existence of a public right of the nature therein referred to, or who, having made such denial, has failed to adduce
reliable evidence in support thereof, shall not in  the subsequent proceedings be permitted to make  any such
denial, nor shall any question in respect of the existence of any such public  right  be inquired into  by any jury
appointed under section 138.]
140. Procedure  on  order  being made absolute. (1) When an order has been made absolute under
section 136, section 137 or section 139, the Magistrate shall give notice of the same to the person against whom
the order was made, and shall further require him to perform the act directed by the order within  a  time to be
fixed in the notice, and inform him that, in case of disobedience, he will be liable to the penalty provided by
section 188 of the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of 1860).
(2) Consequences  of  disobedience  to  order. If  such  act is not  performed within the time fixed,  the
Magistrate may cause it  to be performed, and may recover the costs of performing it, either by the sale of  any
building, goods or other property removed by his order, or by the distress and sale of any other movable property
of  such  person within or  without  the  local limits of  such  Magistrate's  jurisdiction.  If  such  other  property is
without such limits, the order shall authorize its attachment and sale when endorsed by the Magistrate within
the local limits of whose jurisdiction the property to be attached is found.
(3) No suit shall lie in respect of anything done in good faith under this section.
141. Procedure  on  failure  to  appoint  jury  or  omission  to  return  verdict. If  the  applicant,  by
neglect    or  otherwise,  prevents  the  appointment  of  the jury, or if from  any  cause    the    jury  appointed  do  not
return  their verdict within the time fixed or within such further time as the Magistrate may in  his discretion
allow,  the  Magistrate  may  pass  such  order  as  he  thinks  fit,  and  such  order  shall  be  executed in the  manner
provided by section 140.
142. Injunction pending inquiry. (1) If a Magistrate making an order under section 133 considers that
immediate measures should be taken to prevent imminent danger or injury of a serious kind to the public, he
may, whether a jury is to be, or has been, appointed or not, issue such an injunction to the person against whom
the order was made, as is required to obviate or prevent such danger or injury pending the determination of the
matter.
(2) In default of such person forthwith obeying such injunction, the Magistrate may himself  use, or
cause to be used, such means as he thinks fit to obviate such danger or to prevent such injury.
(3) No suit shall lie in respect of anything done in good faith by a Magistrate under this section.
76
143. Magistrate  may  prohibit  repetition  or  continuance  of  public  nuisance. A
1
[Anyother
Executive  Magistrate],  may  order  any  person  not  to  repeat  or  continue  a public nuisance,  and  defined in the
Pakistan Penal Code or any special or local law.
CHAPTER XI
TEMPORARY ORDERS IN URGENT CASES OF NUINANCE OR
APPREHANDED DANGER
144. Power to issue order absolute at once in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger. (1)
In cases where, in the opinion of
2
[the Zila Nazim upon the written recommendation of the  District Superintendent of Police
or Executive District Officer]
3
[ there is sufficient ground for proceeding under this section and] immediate prevention or
speedy remedy is desirable,
2
[the Zila Nazim] may, by a written order stating the material facts of the case and served in manner provided
by section 134, direct any person to abstain from a certain act or take certain order with certain property in his
possession or under his management, if
2
[the Zila Nazim] considers that such direction is  likely to prevent, or
tends  to  prevent,  obstruction,  annoyance  or injury, or risk of  obstruction,  annoyance  or injury, to  any  person
lawfully employed, or danger to human life, health or safety, or a disturbance of the public tranquility, or a riot,
or an affray.
(1) An order under this section may, in case of emergency or in cases where the circumstances do not admit
of the serving in due time of a notice upon the person against whom the order is directed, be passed, exparte.
(2) An order under this section may be directed to a particular individual, or to the  public  generally  when
frequenting or visiting a particular place.
(3)
2
[The Zila Nazim] may,
3
[either  on his own  motion  or  on  the  application  of  any  person  aggrieved],
rescind order made under this section by himself or by his predecessor in office.
3
[(5)  Where  such  an  application is received,  the
2
[Zila  Nazim] shall  afford  to  the  applicant  an  early
opportunity of appearing before him either in person or by pleader and showing cause against  the  order ;  and,
if the
2
[Zila Nazim] rejects the application wholly or in part, he shall record in writing his reasons for so doing.]
4
[(6) No order under this section shall remain in force for more than two
4
[consecutive  days and not  more
than seven days in a month] from the making thereof ; unless, in cases of danger to human life, health   or safety,
or  a likelihood of  a  riot  or  an affray, the
5
[Provincial  Government],  by  notification in the  official  Gazette,
otherwise directs.
1
Subs. by Ord. 12 of 1972, s. 2 and Sch.
2
Subs. and omitted by Ord. 37 of 2001 s. 45 (w.e.f. 14-08-2001).
3
Ins. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 27.
4
The Orignal Sub-section(5) was re-numbered (6) Act 18 of 1923, Section. 27.
5
Subs. by A.O., 1937, for “L.G.”.
77
1
[(7)  In the application of sub-sections (1) to (6)  to the districts where the local  Government
elections have not been held, or the Zila Nazim has not assumed charge of office, any reference in
those provisions to the Zila Nazim shall be read as a reference to the District Coordination Officer
in relation to such districts:
Provided  that  this  sub-section  shall  cease  to  have  effect,  and  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been
repealed, at the time when local Governments are installed in the districts as aforesaid.]
SINDH AMENDMENT-SINHD ACT NO.VI OF 2018