[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 190: Threat  of  injury  to  induce  person  to  refrain  from  applying  for  protection  to  public

servant. Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any person for the purpose of inducing that person
to refrain or desist from making a legal application for protection against any injury to any public servant
legally empowered  as  such  to give such  protection,  or  to  cause  such  protection  to  be given, shall  be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine,
or with both.
CHAPTER XI
OF FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE
191. Giving false evidence. Whoever being legally bound by an oath or by an express provision of
law  to  state  the  truth,  or  being  bound  by  law  to  make  a  declaration  upon  any  subject,  makes  any
statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be
true, is said to give false evidence.
Explanation  1.
otherwise.
Explanation 2.
A statement is within the meaning of this section, whether it is made verbally or
A false statement as to the belief of the person attesting is within the meaning of
this section, and a person may be guilty of giving false evidence by stating that he believes a thing which
he does not believe, as well as by stating that he knows a thing which he does not know.
Illustrations
(a) A, in support of a just claim which B has against Z for one thousand rupees, falsely swears
on a trial that he heard Z admit the justice of B’s claim. A has given false evidence.
(b) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he believes a certain signature to be
the handwriting of Z, when he does not believe it to be the handwriting of Z. Here A states
that which he knows to be false, and therefore gives false evidence.
(c) A,  knowing  the  general  character  of Z’s handwriting, states  that  he  believes  a  certain
signature to be the handwriting of Z ; A in good faith  believing it to  be  so.  Here A’s
statement is merely as to his belief, and is true as to his belief, and therefore, although the
signature may not be the handwriting of Z. A has not given false evidence.
(d) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he knows that Z was at a particular
place on a particular day, not knowing anything upon the subject. A gives false evidence
whether Z was at that place on the day named or not.
(e) A, an interpreter or translator, gives or certifies as a true interpretation or translation of a
statement or document, which he is bound by oath to interpret or translate truly, that which
is not and which he does not believe to be a true interpretation or translation. A has given
false evidence.
192. Fabricating false evidence. Whoever causes  any circumstance to exist or  makes any false
entry in any book or record, or makes any document containing a false statement, intending that such
circumstance,  false  entry  or  false  statement  may  appear in evidence in a judicial proceeding,  or in a
proceeding  taken  by  law  before  a public servant  as  such,  or  before  an  arbitrator,  and  that  such
circumstance, false entry of false statement, so appearing in evidence, may cause any person who in
such proceeding is to form an opinion upon the evidence, to entertain an erroneous opinion touching
any point material to the result of such proceeding, is said" to fabricate false evidence ".
Illustrations
(a) A puts jewels into a box belonging to Z, with the intention that they may be found in that
box, and that this circumstance may cause Z to be convicted of theft. A has fabricated false
evidence.
(b) A makes a false entry in his shop-book for the purpose of using it as corroborative evidence
in a Court of Justice. A has fabricated false evidence.
(c) A, with the intention of causing Z to be convicted of a criminal conspiracy, writes a letter
in imitation of Z's handwriting, purporting to be addressed to an accomplice in such criminal
conspiracy, and puts the letter in a place which he knows that the officers of the Police are
likely to search. A has fabricated false evidence.
193. Punishment for false evidence. Whoever intentionally gives false evidence in any stage of a
judicial proceeding, or fabricates false evidence for the purpose of being used in any stage of a judicial
proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine ;
and whoever intentionally gives or fabricates false evidence in any other case, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
Explanation 1.
Explanation 2.
A trial before a Court-martial
1
* * * is a judicial proceeding.
An investigation directed by law preliminary to a proceeding before a Court of
Justice, is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that investigation may not take place before a Court
of Justice.
2
* * * * * * *
1
The words "or before a Military Court of Request" were rep. by the Cantonments Act, 1889 (13 of 1889). Act 13 of 1889 was rep. by the Cantonments Act, 1910
(15 of 1910) which in turn has been rep. by the Cantonments Act, 1924 (2 of 1924).
2
Illustration omitted by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Ordinance, 1981 (27 of 1981), s. 3 and II Sch.
Explanation 3. An investigation directed by a Court of Justice according to law, and conducted under the
authority of a Court of Justice, is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that investigation may not take place
before a Court of Justice.
Illustration
A, in an enquiry before an officer deputed by a Court of Justice to ascertain on the spot the boundaries of
land, makes on oath a statement which he knows to be false. As this enquiry is a stage of a judicial proceeding,
A has given false evidence.