[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CPC Section 37: Certified copy of decree to be sent to Court whose decree

appealed from.– A copy of the judgment and of the decree, certified by the
Appellate Court or such officer as it appoints in this behalf, shall be sent to the
Court which passed the decree appealed from and shall be filed with the original
proceedings in the suit, and an entry of the judgment of the Appellate Court shall
be made in the register of civil suits.
ORDER XLII
APPEALS FROM APPELLATE DECREES
1. Procedure.– The rules of Order XLI shall apply, so far as may be, to
appeals from Appellate decrees.
ORDER XLIII
APPEALS FROM ORDERS
1. Appeals from Orders.– An appeal shall lie from the following orders under
the provisions of section 104, namely:
__
(a) an order under rule 10 of Order VII returning a plaint to be
presented to the proper Court;
(b) an order under rule 10 of Order VIII pronouncing judgment
against a party;
(c) an order under rule 9 of Order IX rejecting an application (in a
case open to appeal) for an order to set aside the dismissal of
a suit;
(d) an order under rule 13 of Order IX rejecting an application (in a
case open  to appeal) for an order to set aside a decree
passed ex parte;
(e) an order under rule 4 of Order X pronouncing judgment against
a party;
(f) an order under rule 21 of Order XI;
(g) an order under rule 10 of Order XVI for the attachment of
property;
(h) an order under rule 20 of Order XVI pronouncing judgment
against a party;
(i) an order under rule 34 of Order XXI on an objection to the draft
of a document or of an endorsement;
1
[(ii) an order under rule 62 or rule 103 of Order XXI relating to the
right, title or interest of the claimant or objector in attached
property;]
(j) an order under rule 72 or rule 92 of Order XXI setting aside or
refusing to set aside a sale;
1
Cl. (ii), added by the LawReforms Ordinance, 1972(12of 1972), s.2and Sch.
(k) an order under rule 9 of Order XXII refusing to set aside the
abatement or dismissal of a suit;
(l) an order under rule 10 of Order XXII giving or refusing to give
leave;
(m) an order under rule 3 of Order XXIII recording or refusing
to record an agreement, compromise or satisfaction;
(n) an order under rule 2 of Order XXV rejecting an application (in
a case open to appeal) for an order to set aside the
dismissal of a suit;
(o) an order
1
[under rule 2, rule 4 or rule 7] of Order XXXIV
refusing to extend the time for the payment of
mortgage-money;
(p) an order in interpleader-suits under rule 3, rule 4 or rule 6 of
Order XXXV;
(q) an order under rule 2, rule 3 or rule 6 of Order XXXVIII;
(r) an order under rule 1, rule 2, rule 4 or rule 10 of Order XXXIX;
(s) an order under rule 1 or rule 4 of Order XL;
(t) an order of refusal under rule 19 of Order XLI to readmit, or
under rule 21 of Order XLI to re-hear an, appeal;
(u) an order under rule 23 of Order XLI remanding a case where
an appeal would lie from the decree of the Appellate Court;
(v) an order made by any Court other than a High Court
refusing the grant of a certificate under rule 6 of Order XLV;
(w) an order under rule 4 of Order XLVII granting an application for
review.
2. Procedure.– The rules of Order XLI shall apply, so far as may be, to
appeals from orders.
2
[3. Notice before presentation of appeal.– (1) Where an appeal against an
order is preferred during the pendency of a suit, the appellant shall, before
presenting the appeal, give notice of such appeal to the respondent or his
advocate by delivering a copy of the memorandum and grounds of appeal along
with a copy of the order appealed against
3
[either personally or through registered
post acknowledgement due and the postal or other receipt shall be filed with the
memorandum of appeal for the record of the appellate Court].
(2) On receipt of notice referred to in sub-rule (1), the respondent may, with
the permission of the Court, appear before it and contest the appeal and may be
awarded costs on dismissal of the appeal in limine.
1
Substituted by the Transfer of Property (Amendment) Supplementary Act, 1930(16of 1930), s.2, for “under rule 3or rule 8”.
2
New sub-rules 3and 4 added by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment), Ordinance, 1980(10of 1980), s.14.
3
Substituted for the words “and obtain an acknowledgement of receipt thereof for the information of the appellate Court” by the
Civil  Laws  (Reforms)  Act,  1994  (  XIV  of  1994);  assented  to  by  the  President  on  27  July  1994;  and,  was  published  in  the
Gazette of Pakistan (Extraordinary), dated: 31 July 1994, pp. 683-688, s. 11.
4. Application of Rule 3.– The provisions of rule 3 shall, mutatis mutandis,
apply to all applications filed before an appellate Court during the pendency of a
suit.]
ORDER XLIV
PAUPER APPEALS
1. Who may appeal as pauper.– Any person entitled to prefer an appeal,
who is unable to pay the fee required for the memorandum of appeal, may
present an application accompanied by a memorandum of appeal, and may be
allowed to appeal as a pauper subject, in all matters, including the presentation of
such application, to the provisions relating to suits by paupers, in so far as
those provisions are applicable:
Procedure on application for admission of appeal. Provided that the
Court shall reject the application unless, upon a perusal thereof and of the
judgment and decree appealed from, it sees reason to think that the decree is
contrary to law or to some usage having the force of law, or is otherwise
erroneous or unjust .
2. Inquiry into pauperism.– The inquiry into the pauperism of the applicant
may be made either by the Appellate Court or under the order of the Appellate
Court by the Court from whose decision the appeal is preferred:
Provided that, if the applicant was allowed to sue or appeal as a pauper in
the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred, no further inquiry in respect
of his pauperism shall be necessary, unless the Appellate Court sees cause to
direct such inquiry.
ORDER XLV
APPEALS TO THE
1
[SUPREME COURT]
2
[1. “Decree” defined.– In this Order, unless there is something repugnant in
the subject or context, the expression "decree" shall include a judgment or a final
Order.]
2. Application to Court whose decree complained of.– Whoever
desires to appeal to
3
[the Supreme Court] shall apply by petition to the Court
whose decree is complained of.
3. Certificate as to value or fitness.–
4
[(1) A petition made under rule 2
shall briefly state the grounds of appeal and pray for a certificate.]
(2) Upon receipt of such petition, the Court shall direct notice to be
served on the opposite party to show cause why the said certificate should not be
granted[:]
5
1
[Provided that no notice shall be directed to be served on or given to the
opposite party or to the legal representative of a deceased opposite party in a
1
Substituted by A.O, 1961, Art. 2and Sch., for “King in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
2
Substituted by F.A.O., 1975, Art, 2and Sch. (with effect fromthe 14th August, 1973), for the originalrule1.
3
Substituted by A.O, 1961, Art. 2and Sch., for “His Majesty in council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
4
Substituted by F.A.O., 1975, Art. 2and Sch. (with effect fromthe 14th August, 1973), for the originalsub-rule (1).
5
Substituted ibid., for full-stop
case where such opposite party did not appear either at the hearing in the Court
whose decree is complained of or at any proceedings subsequent to the decree
of that Court.]
2
[(3) The Court may, if the opposite party in response to the notice
issued under sub-rule (2) appears, after hearing both the parties, or if the
opposite party does not appear in response to such notice, then after hearing the
party making the petition, grant or refuse the certificate.
(4) If on the date fixed for the hearing, the party making the petition
does not appear and the opposite party appears in response to such notice or if
both the parties do not appear on such date, the petition shall be dismissed.
4. Consolidation of suits.– For the purposes of pecuniary valuation, suits
involving substantially the same questions for determination and decided by the
same judgment may be consolidated: but suits decided by separate judgments
shall not be consolidated, notwithstanding that they involve substantially the
same questions for determination.
5. Remission of dispute to Court of first instance.– In the event of any
dispute arising between the parties as to the amount or value of the subject-matter
of the suit in the Court of first instance, or as to the amount or value of the subject
matter in dispute on appeal to
3
[the Supreme Court], the Court to which a petition
for a certificate is made under rule 2 may, if it thinks fit, refer such dispute for
report to the Court of first instance, which last-mentioned Court shall proceed to
determine such amount or value and shall return its report together with the
evidence to the Court by which the reference was made.
6. [Effect of refusal of certificate.] Omitted by F.A.O., 1975 Art.2 and Sch.
7. Security and deposit required on grant of certificate.- (1) Where
the certificate is granted, the applicant shall within
4
[ninety days or such further
period, not exceeding sixty days, as the Court may upon cause shown allow] from
the date of the decree complained of, or within six weeks from the date of the grant
of the certificate, whichever is the later date, -
a) furnish security
5
[in cash or in Government securities] for the costs of
the respondent, and
b) deposit the amount required to defray the expense of translating,
transcribing, indexing
6
[, printing] and transmitting to
7
[the Supreme Court] a correct
copy of the whole record of the suit, except –
(1) formal documents directed to be excluded by any
8
[Rule of the
Supreme Court] in force for the time being;
1
Proviso added by F.A.O., 1975, Art. 2and Sch. (with effect fromthe 14th August, 1973).
2
Sub-rules (3) and (4) added ibid.
3
Substituted by A.O., 1961. Art. 2and Sch., for “His Majesty in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
4
Substituted by the Indian Limitation and Code of CivilProcedure (Amendment) Act, 1920(26of 1920), s.3, for “sixmonths”.
5
Inserted by the Indian Limitation and Code of CivilProcedure (Amendment) Act, 1920(26of 1920), s.3.
6
Inserted by A.O., 1961, Art. 2and Sch. (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
7
Substituted ibid., for “His Majesty in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
8
Substituted ibid., for “Order of His Majesty in Council” (witheffect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
(2) papers which the parties agree to exclude;
(3) accounts, or portions of accounts, which the officer empowered by
the Court for that purpose considers unnecessary, and which the parties have not
specifically asked to be included; and
(4) such other documents as the High Court may direct to be excluded:
1
[Provided that the Court at the time of granting the certificate may, after
hearing any opposite party who appears, order on the ground of special hardship
that some other form of security may be furnished:
Provided further, that no adjournment shall be granted to an opposite party
to contest the nature of such security.]
2
[* * * * * *]
8. Admission of appeal and procedure thereon.– Where such security
has been furnished and deposit made to the satisfaction of the Court, the Court
shall-
a) declare the appeal admitted,
b) give notice thereof to the respondent,
c) transmit to
3
[the Supreme Court] under the seal of the Court a
correct copy of the said record, except as aforesaid, and
d) give to either party one or more authenticated copies of any of the
papers in the suit on his applying therefore and paying the reasonable expenses
incurred in preparing them.
9. Revocation of acceptance of security.– At any time before the
admission of the appeal the Court may, upon cause shown, revoke the
acceptancy of any such security, and make further directions thereon.
9A. [Power to dispense with notices in case of deceased parties.] Omitted by
F.A.O. 1975, Art.2 and Sch.
10. Power to order further security or payment.– Where at any time
after the admission of an appeal but before the transmission of the copy of the
record, except as aforesaid, to
4
[the Supreme Court], such security appears
inadequate,  or further payment is required for the purpose of translating,
transcribing, printing, indexing or transmitting the copy of the record, except as
aforesaid, the Court may order the appellant to furnish, within a time to be fixed
by the Court, other and sufficient security, or to make, within like time, the required
payment.
11. Effect of failure to comply with order.– Where the appellant fails to
comply with such order, the proceedings shall be stayed,  and the appeal shall not
1
Inserted by the Indian Limitation and Code of CivilProcedure (Amendment) Act, 1920(26of 1920), s.3.
2
Sub-section  (2),  as  amended  by  the  FederalLaws  (Revision  and  Declaration) Act  1951(26of  1951),  s.4and  Third  Sch.,  has
been omitted by A.O., 1961, Art. 2and Sch. (with effect from the 23rd March, 1956).
3
Substituted by A.O., 1961, Art. 2and Sch., for “His Majesty in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
4
Substituted by A.O., 1961, Art. 2andSch., for “His Majesty in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
proceed without an order in this behalf of
1
[the Supreme Court], and in the
meantime execution of the decree appealed from shall not be stayed.
12. Refund of balance deposit.– When the copy of the record, except as
aforesaid, has been transmitted to
2
[the supreme Court], the appellant may
obtain a refund of the balance (if any) of the amount which he has deposited
under rule 7.
13. Powers of Court of pending appeal.– (1) Notwithstanding the grant of
a certificate for the admission of any appeal, the decree appealed from shall be
unconditionally executed, unless the Court otherwise directs.
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, on special cause shown by any party
interested in the suit, or otherwise appearing to the Court,
__
a) impound any moveable property in dispute or any part thereof, or
b) allow the decree appealed from to be executed, taking such security
from the respondent as the Court thinks fit for the due performance of any order
which
3
[the Supreme Court] may make on the appeal, or
c) stay the execution of the decree appealed from, taking such
security from the appellant as the Court thinks fit for the due performance of the
decree appealed from, or of any order which
4
[the Supreme Court] may make on
the appeal, or
d) place any party seeking the assistance of the Court under such
conditions or give such other direction respecting the subject-matter of the appeal,
as it thinks fit, by the appointment of a receiver or otherwise.
14. Increase of security found Inadequate.- (1) Where at any time during
the pendency of the appeal the security furnished by either party appears
inadequate, the Court may, on the application of the other party, require further
security.
(2) In default of such further security being furnished as required by the
Court,
__
(a) if the original security was furnished by the appellant, the Court may,
on the application of the respondent, executes, the decree appealed from as if
the appellant had furnished no such security;
(b) if the original security was furnished by the respondent, the Court
shall, so far as may be practicable, stay the further execution of the decree, and
restore the parties to the position in which they respectively were when the
security which appears inadequate was furnished, or give such direction
respecting the subject-matter of the appeal as it thinks fit.
15. Procedure to enforce orders of the Supreme Court.- (1)
Whoever desires to obtain execution of any order of
5
[the Supreme Court] shall
1
Substituted by A.O., 1961, Art. 2andSch., for “His Majesty in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
2
Substituted by A.O., 1961, Art. 2andSch., for “His Majesty in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
3
Substituted by A.O., 1961, Art. 2andSch., for “His Majesty in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
4
Substituted by A.O., 1961, Art. 2andSch., for “His Majesty in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
5
Substituted by A.O., 1961, Art. 2andSch., for “His Majesty in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
apply by petition, accompanied by a certified copy of the decree passed or order
made in appeal and sought to be executed, to the Court from which the appeal to
1
[the Supreme Court] was preferred.
(2) Such Court shall transmit the order of
2
[the Supreme Court] to the
Court which passed the first decree appealed from, or to such other Court as
3
[the Supreme Court] by such order may direct, and shall (upon the application of
either party) give such directions as may be required for the execution of the
same; and the Court to which the said order is so transmitted shall execute it
accordingly, in the manner and according to the provisions applicable to the
execution of its original decrees.
4
[* * * * * * *]
5
[(4) Unless
6
[the Supreme Court] is pleased otherwise to direct, no order of
7
[the
Supreme Court] shall be inoperative on the ground that no notice has been served
on or given to the legal representative of any deceased opposite party or
deceased respondent in a case, where such opposite party or respondent did
not appear either at the hearing in the Court whose decree was complained of or
at any proceedings subsequent to the decree of that Court, but such order shall
have the same force and effect as if it had been made before the death took
place.]
16. Appeal from order relating to execution. The orders made by the
Court which executes the order of
8
[the Supreme Court], relating to such
execution, shall be appealable in the same manner and subject to the same rules
as the orders of such Court relating to the execution of its own decrees.
9
17. [Appeals to the Federal Court]. Omitted by the Federal Court Act 1941
(XXI of 1941), S.2.
_______
ORDER XLVI
REFERENCE
1. Reference of question to High Court. Where, before or on the hearing of a
suit or an appeal in which the decree is not subject to appeal, or where, in the
execution of any such decree, any question of law or usage having the force of
law arises, on which the Court trying the suit or appeal, or executing the
decree, entertains reasonable doubt, the Court may, either of its own motion or
on the application of any of the parties, draw up a statement of the facts of the
1
Substituted by A.O., 1961, Art. 2andSch., for “His Majesty in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
2
Substituted by A.O., 1961, Art. 2andSch., for “His Majesty in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
3
Substituted by A.O., 1961, Art. 2andSch., for “His Majesty in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
4
Sub-rule (3) omitted by the FederalLaws (Revision and Declaration) Ordinance, 1981(27of 1981), s.3and Second Sch., which
was previously amended by various enacments, fromtime to time.
5
Sub-section (4) Inserted by the Indian Limitation and Code of CivilProcedure (Amendment) Act, 1920(26of 1920), s.5.
6
Substituted by A.O., 1961, Art. 2and Sch., for “His Majesty in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
7
Substituted by A.O., 1961, Art. 2and Sch., for “His Majesty in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
8
Substituted by A.O., 1961, Art. 2and Sch., for “His Majesty in Council” (with effect fromthe 23rd March, 1956).
9
This section was Inserted by A.O., 1937.
case and the point on which doubt is entertained, and refer such statement with
its own opinion on the point for the decision of the High Court.
2. Court may pass decree contingent upon decision of High Court. The
Court may either stay the proceedings or proceed in the case notwithstanding
such reference, and may pass a decree or make an order contingent upon the
decision of the High Court on the point referred;
but no decree or order shall be executed in any case in which such reference
is made until the receipt of a copy of the judgment of the High Court upon the
reference.