[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 116: Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment if offence be not

committed; Whoever  abets  an  offence punishable  with  imprisonment  shall,  if  that  offence  be  not
committed  in  consequence  of  the  abetment,  and  no  express  provision  is  made  by  this  Code  for  the
punishment  of  such  abetment,  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of  any  description  provided  for  that
offence for a term which may extend to one­fourth part of the longest term provided for that offence;
or with such fine as is provided for that offence, or with both ;
if abettor or person abetted be a public servant whose duty it is to prevent offence. and if the
abettor or the person abetted is a public servant, whose duty it is to prevent the commission of such
offence, the abettor shall be punished with imprisonment of any description provided for that offence,
for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term provided for that offence, or with such
fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.
Illustrations
(a) A offers a bribe to B, a public servant, as a reward for showing A some favour in the exercise
of B’s official functions. B refuses to accept the bribe. A is punishable under this section.
(b) A  instigates  B  to give false  evidence.  Here, if B  does  not give false  evidence,  A  has
nevertheless committed the offence defined in this section, and is punishable accordingly.
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s.2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
(c) A, a police-officer, whose duty it is to prevent robbery, abets the commission of robbery.
Here, though the robbery be not committed, A is liable to one-half of the longest term of
imprisonment provided for that offence, and also to fine.
(d) B abets the commission of a robbery by A, a police-officer, whose duty it is to prevent that
offence. Here though the robbery be not committed, B is liable to one-half of the longest
term of imprisonment provided for the offence of robbery, and also to fine.
117. Abetting  commission  of  offence  by  the  public  or  by  more  than  ten  persons. Whoever
abets  the commission of  an  offence  by  the public generally  or  by  any  number  or  class  of  persons
exceeding ten, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration
A affixes in a public place a placard instigating a sect consisting of more than ten members to meet
at a certain time and place, for the purpose of attacking the members of an adverse sect, while engaged
in a procession. A has committed the offence defined in this section.