[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CPC Section 6: Particulars of set-off to be given in written statement

_
(1) Where in a
suit for the recovery of money the defendant claims to set-off against the
plaintiff's demand any ascertained sum of money legally recoverable by him from
the plaintiff, not exceeding the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, and
both parties fill the same character as they fill in the plaintiff's suit, the defendant
may, at the first hearing of the suit, but not afterwards unless permitted by the
Court, present a written statement containing the particulars of the debt sought to
be set-off.
(2) Effect of Set-off.
_
The written statement shall have the same effect as
a plaint in a cross-suit so as to enable the Court to pronounce a final judgement in
respect both of the original claim and of the set-off: but this shall not affect the lien,
upon the amount decreed, of any pleader in respect of the costs payable to him
under the decree.
(3) The rules relating to a written statement by a defendant apply to a
written statement in answer to a claim of set-off.
Illustrations
(a) A bequeaths Rs.2,000 to B and appoints C his executor and
residuary legatee. B dies and D takes out administration to B's effect. C pays
Rs.1,000 as surety for D; then D sues C for the legacy. C cannot set-off the debt
of Rs.1,000 against the legacy, for neither C nor D fills the same character with
respect to the legacy as they fill with respect to the payment of the Rs.1,000.
(b) A dies intestate and in debt to B. C takes out administration to A's
effects and B buys part of the effects from C. In a suit for the purchase-money by
C against B, the latter cannot set-off the debt against the price, for C fills two
different characters, one as the vendor to B, in which he sues B, and the other as
representative to A.
(c) A sues B on a bill of exchange. B alleges that A has wrongfully
neglected to insure B's goods and is liable to him in compensation which he
claims to set-off. The amount not being ascertained cannot be set-off.
(d) A sues B on a bill of exchange for Rs.500. B holds a judgment
against A for Rs.1,000. The two claims being both definite pecuniary demands may
be set-off.
(e) A sues B for compensation on account of trespass. B holds a
promissory note for Rs.1,000 from A and claims to set-off that amount against any
sum that A may recover in the suit. B may do so, for, as soon as A recovers, both
sums as definite pecuniary demands.
(f) A and B sue C for Rs.1,000, C cannot set-off a debt due to him by A
alone.
(g) A sues B and C for Rs.1,000. B cannot set-off a debt due to him alone
by A.
(h) A owes the partnership firm of B and C Rs.1,000. B dies, leaving C
surviving. A sues C for a debt of Rs.1,500 due in his separate character. C may
set-off the debt of Rs.1,000.