[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/CrPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

CrPC Section 167: Procedure when investigation cannot be completed in twenty-four hours

(1) Whenever
1
[any
person is arrested  and detained in custody, and it appears that the] investigation
2
* * * cannot be completed
within  the  period  of  twenty-four  hours  fixed  by  section  61,  and  there  are  grounds  for  believing  that  the
accusation  or  information  is  well-founded,  the  officer  in  charge  of  the  police-station
3
[or  the  police-officer
making  the  investigation  if  he  is  not  below  the  rank  of  sub-inspector]  shall  forthwith  transmit  to  the  nearest
Magistrate a copy of the entries in the diary hereinafter prescribed relating to the case, and shall at the same
time forward the accused
4
* * * to such Magistrate.
(2) The Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded under this section may, whether he has or  has
not jurisdiction to try the case from time  to time authorize the detention of the accused in such custody as such
Magistrate thinks fit, for a term not exceeding fifteen days in the whole. If he has not jurisdiction to  try the case
or
5
[send] it for trial, and considers further detention unnecessary, he  may order the  accused to be forwarded
to a Magistrate having such jurisdiction:
6
[Provided  that  no  Magistrate  of  the  third  class,  and  no  Magistrate  of  the  second  class  not  specially
empowered  in  this  behalf  by  the
7
[Provincial  Government  ]shall  authorise  detention  in  the  custody  of  the
police.]
(3) A Magistrate authorizing under this section detention in the custody of the police shall record his reasons
for so doing.
8
[(4) The Magistrate giving such order shall forward a  copy of his order, with his reasons for making it,  to
the Sessions Judge.].
9
[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in  sections 60 and 61 or hereinbefore to the contrary, where  the
accused forwarded under sub-section (2) is a female, the Magistrate shall not, except in the  cases involving qatl
or  dacoity  supported  by  reasons  to  be  recorded in  writing, authorise  the  detention  of  the    accused in police
custody, and the police officer making an investigation shall interrogate the  accused referred to in sub-section
(1) in the prison in the presence of an officer of jail and a female police-officer.
(6) The officer in charge  of  the  prison  shall  make  appropriate  arrangements  for  the admission of  the
investigating police-officer into the prison for the purpose of interrogating the accused.
(7) If for the purpose of investigation, it is necessary that the accused referred to in sub-section (1) be taken
out of the prison, the officer in charge of the police station or the police-officer making investigation, not below
the rank of sub-inspector, shall apply to the Magistrate in that behalf and
1
Subs. ibid., s. 38, for “it appears that any”.
2
The words “under this Chapter” rep., ibid.
3
Ins. ibid.
4
The words and brackets “(if any)” rep., ibid.
5
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s.2 and Sch., for “commit”.
6
Provisio ins. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 38.
7
Subs. by A.O., 1937, for “L.G”.
8
Subs. by Ordinance 12 of 1972, s. 2 and Sch., for sub-section (4).
9
Ins. by Act XX of 1994, s. 2.
91
the Magistrate may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, permit taking of accused out of the prison in
the company of a female police officer appointed by the Magistrate :
Provided that the accused shall not be kept out of the prison while in the custody of the police between
sunset and sunrise].
168. Report of investigation by subordinate police-officer. When any subordinate police-officer has
made any investigation under this Chapter, he shall report the result of such investigation to the officer in charge
of the police-station.
169. Release  of  accused  when  evidence  deficient. If,  upon  an  investigation  under  this  Chapter, it
appears  to  the  officer in charge  of  the  police-station
1
[or  to  the  police-officer  making  the  investigation]  that
there is not sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion to justify the forwarding of the accused to    a
Magistrate, such officer shall, if such person is in custody, release him on his executing a bond, with or without
sureties, as such officer may direct, to appear, if and when so required, before a Magistrate empowered to take
cognizance of the offence on a police-report and to try the accused or
2
[send] him for trial.
170. Case  to be  sent to Magistrate  when evidence is sufficient. (1) If, upon an investigation under
this Chapter, it appears to the officer in charge of the police-station that there is sufficient evidence or reasonable
ground as aforesaid, such officer shall forward the accused under custody to a Magistrate empowered to take
cognizance of the offence upon a police-report and to try the accused or
2
[send] him for trial or, if the offence
is bailable and the accused is able to give security, shall take security from him for his appearance before such
Magistrate on a day fixed and for his attendance from day to day before such Magistrate until otherwise directed.
(2)  When  the  officer in charge  of  a  police-station  forwards  an  accused  person  to  a  Magistrate  or  takes
security  for his appearance  before  such  Magistrate  under  this  section,  he  shall  send  to  such  Magistrate  any
weapon or other article which it may be necessary to produce before him, and shall require the complainant
(if any) and so many of the persons who appear to such officer to be acquainted with the circumstances of the
case  as  he  may  think  necessary,  to  execute  a  bond  to  appear  before  the  Magistrate  as  thereby  directed  and
prosecute or give evidence (as the case may be) in the matter of the charge against the accused.
3
* * * * * * *
4
* * * * * * *
(5) The officer in whose presence the bond is executed shall deliver a copy thereof to one of the persons
who executed it, and shall then send to the Magistrate the original with his report.
171. Complainants   and   witnesses   not   to   be   required   to   accompany   police-officer. No
complainant  or  witness  on his way  to  the  Court  of  the  Magistrate  shall  be  required  to  accompany  a
police-officer,
1
Ins. by Act, 18 of 1923, s. 39.
2
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for "commit".
3
Omitted by ordinance 12 of 1972, s. 2 and Sch.
4
Sub-section (4) rep. by the code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt). Act 1926 (2 of 1926), s. 2.
92
Complainents and witnesses not to be subjected to restraint. or shall be subjected to unnecessary
restraint or inconvenience, or required to give any security for his appearance other than his own bond.
Recusant complainant witness may be forwarded in custody. Provided that, if any complainant or
witness refuses to attend or to execute a bond as  directed in section 170, the officer in  charge of the police-
station may forward him in custody to the Magistrate, who may detain him in custody until he executes such
bond, or until the hearing of the case is completed.