[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 161: Public servant taking gratification other than legal remuneration in respect of an official

act. Whoever, being or expecting to be a public servant, accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept, or attempts to
obtain  from any person,  for himself or  for any  other person, any gratification whatever, other  than legal
remuneration, as a motive or reward for doing or for bearing to do any official act or for showing or for bearing
to show, in the exercise of his official functions, favour or disfavour to any person, or for rendering or attempting
to  render any service  or  disservice  to any person,
2
[with the
3
[Federal],  or any Provincial Government or
Legislature], or with any public servant, as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years or with fine or with both.
1
Subs. by Ord. No. 86 of 2002, s. 2 and Sch. I, for “one Thousand rupees”.
2
Subs. by A. O., 1937, for “with the Legislative or Executive G. of I., or with the Government of any Presidency, or with any Lieutenant Governor”.
3
Subs. by the Federal Adaptation of Laws Order, 1975 (P.O. No. 4 of 1975), Art. 2 and Table for “Central”.
Explanation. “Expecting to be a public servant.” If a person not expecting to be in office
obtains a gratification by deceiving others into a belief that he is about to be in office, and that he will
then serve them, he may be guilty of cheating, but he is not guilty of the offence defined in this section.
“Gratification.”  The  word  “gratification”  is  not  restricted  to  pecuniary  gratifications,  or  to
gratifications estimable in money.
“Legal remuneration.” The words “legal remuneration” are not restricted to remuneration which  a
public servant  can lawfully demand,  but  include  all  remuneration  which  he is permitted  by  the
l
[authority by which he is employed], to accept.
“A motive or reward for doing.” A person who receives a gratification as a motive for doing what
he does not intend to do, or as a reward for doing what he has not done, comes within these words.
2
[‘Public servant’. In this section and in sections 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169 and 409,
‘public  servant’  includes  an  employee  of  any  corporation  or  other  body  or  organization  set  up,
controlled or administered by, or under the authority of, the Federal Government.]
Illustrations
(a) A, a munsif, obtains from Z, a banker, a situation in Z's bank for A’s brother, as a reward to
A for deciding a cause in favour of Z. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A, holding the  office  of
3
[Consul]  at  the  Court  of  a
4
[Foreign]  Power accepts a  lakh  of
rupees from the Minister of that Power. It does not appear, that A accepted this sum as a
motive or reward for doing or forbearing to do any particular official act, or for rendering
or  attempting  to  render  any  particular  service  to  that  Power with the
5
[Government  of
Pakistan]. But it does appear that A accepted the sum as a motive or reward for generally
showing favour in the exercise of his official functions to that Power. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.
(c) A,  a public servant,  induces  Z  erroneously  to  believe  that A’s influence with the
Government has obtained a title for Z and thus induces Z to give A money as a reward for
this service. A has committed the offence defined in this section.