[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://na.gov.pk/uploads/documents/63ea176f52421_610.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

Constitution Section 238: Subject to this Part, the Constitution may be amended by

Act of
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)].
2
[239.(1) A Bill to amend the Constitution may originate in
either House and, when the Bill has been passed by the votes of
not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House, it
shall be transmitted to the other House.
(2)    If the Bill is passed without amendment by the votes
of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House
to which it is transmitted under clause (1), it shall, subject to the
provisions of clause (4), be presented to the President for assent.
(3)    If the Bill is passed with amendment by the votes of
not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House to
which it is transmitted under clause (1), it shall be reconsidered
by the House in which it had originated, and if the Bill as amend-
ed by the former House is passed by the latter by the votes of not
less  than two-thirds of its total membership it shall, subject to the
provisions of clause (4), be presented to the President for assent.
(4)    A Bill to amend the Constitution which would have
the effect of altering the limits of a Province shall not be present-
ed to the President for assent unless it has been passed by the
Provincial Assembly of that Province by the votes of not less than
two-thirds of its total membership.
(5)    No amendment of the Constitution shall be called in
question in any court on any ground whatsoever.
(6)    For the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared that
there is no limitation whatever on the power of the Majlis-e-
Shoora (Parliament) to amend any of the provisions of the
Constitution.]
––––––––
Amendment of
Constitution.
Constitution,
amendment
Bill.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN                      139
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
See footnote 9 on page 5, supra.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Second Amdt.) Order, 1985 (P. O. No. 20 of 1985), Art. 3,
for Article 239, which was previously subs. by P. O. No. 14 of 1985, Art. 2 and Sch., for
‘‘the original Article 239.’’
PART XII
Miscellaneous
CHAPTER1.–SERVICES
240.Subject to the Constitution, the appointments to and the
conditions of service of persons in the service of Pakistan shall be
determined–
(a) in the case of the services of the Federation, posts in
connection with the affairs of the Federation and All-
Pakistan Services, by or under Act of
1
[Majlis-e-
Shoora (Parliament)]; and
(b) in the case of the services of a Province and posts in
connection with the affairs of a Province, by or under
Act of the Provincial Assembly.
Explanation.–In this Article, ‘‘All-Pakistan Service’’ means
a service common to the Federation and the Provinces, which
was in existence immediately before the commencing day or
which may be created by Act of
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)].
241.Until the appropriate Legislature makes a law under Article
240, all rules and orders in force immediately before the com-
mencing day shall, so far as consistent with the provisions of the
Constitution, continue in force and may be amended from time to
time by the Federal Government or, as the case may be the
Provincial Government.
242.(1)
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] in relation to the
affairs of the Federation, and the Provincial Assembly of a
Province in relation to the affairs of the Province may, by law
provide for the establishment and Constitution of a Public
Service Commission.
2
[(1A)  The Chairman of the Public Service Commission
constituted in relation to the affairs of the Federation shall be
appointed by the President
3
[on the advice of the Prime
Minister.]]
4
[(1B)  The Chairman of the Public Service Commission
constituted in relation to affairs of a Province shall be appointed
by the Governor on advice of the Chief Minister.]
Appointments
to service of
Pakistan and
conditions of
service.
Existing rules,
etc., to
continue.
Public Service
Commission.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN141
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
See footnote 9 on page 5, supra.
2
Ins. by P.O. No. 14 of 1985, Art. 2 and sch.
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10  of 2010), s. 89 for “in
his discretion”.
4
New clause (1B) ins. ibid.
(2) A Public Service Commission shall perform such
functions as may be prescribed by law.
C
H
APTER
2.–AR
MED
FO
RCES
1
[243.(1)The Federal Government shall have control and com-
mand of the Armed Forces.
(2)  Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
provision, the Supreme Command of the Armed Forces shall vest
in the President.
(3) The President shall subject to law, have power–
(a) to raise and maintain the Military, Naval and Air
Forces of Pakistan; and the Reserves of such Forces;
and
(b) to grant Commissions in such Forces.
(4) The President shall, on advice of the Prime Minister,
appoint–
(a) the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee ;
(b) the Chief of the Army Staff;
(c) the Chief of the Naval Staff; and
(d) the Chief of the Air Staff,
and shall also determine their salaries and allowances.]
244.Every member of the Armed Forces shall make oath in the
form set out in the Third Schedule.
245.
2
[(1)] The Armed Forces shall, under the directions of the
Federal Government defend Pakistan against external aggression
or threat of war, and, subject to law, act in aid of civil power
when called upon to do so.
Command of
Armed Forces.
Oath of Armed
Forces.
Functions of
Armed Forces.
142CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Subs.by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 90 for
“Article 243”.
2
Re-numbered as clause (1) by the Constitution (Seventh Amdt.) Act, 1977 (23 of
1977), s. 4. (w.e.f. the 21st April, 1977).
1
[(2)The validity of any direction issued by the Federal
Government under clause (1) shall not be called in question in
any court.
(3) A High Court shall not exercise any jurisdiction under
Article 199 in relation to any area in which the Armed Forces of
Pakistan are, for the time being, acting in aid of civil power in
pursuance of Article 245:
Provided that this clause shall not be deemed to affect the
jurisdiction of the High Court in respect of any proceeding pend-
ing immediately before the day on which the Armed Forces start
acting in aid of civil power.
(4) Any proceeding in relation to an area referred to in
clause (3) instituted on or after the day the Armed Forces start
acting in aid of civil power and pending in any High Court shall
remain suspended for the period during which the Armed Forces
are so acting.]
C
HAPTER3.–TRIBALAREAS
246.In the Constitution,–
(a) ‘‘Tribal Areas’’ means the areas in Pakistan which,
immediately before the commencing day, were Tribal
Areas, and includes–
(i) the Tribal Areas of
2
[Balochistan] and the
3
[Khyber Pakhtunkhwa]Province
4
*.
(ii) the former States of Amb, Chitral, Dir and Swat;
5
[ *     *     *     *     *     *     *
*     *     *     *     *     *     *]
(b) ‘‘Provincially Administered Tribal Areas’’ means –
(i) the districts of Chitral, Dir and Swat (which
includes Kalam)
6
[the Tribal Area in Kohistan
district,] Malakand Protected Area, the Tribal
Area adjoining
7
[Mansehra] district and the
former State of Amb; and
Tribal Areas.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN143
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Added by the Constitution (Seventh Amdt.) Act, 1977 (23 of 1977), s. 4 (w.e.f.the
21st April, 1977).
2
Subs.by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 91, for
“Baluchistan”.
3
Subs. ibid., for “North-West-Frontier”.
4
The word “and” omitted ibid.
5
Sub paragraphs (iii) and (iv) omitted by the Constitution (Nineteenth Amendment)
Act, 2011 (1 of 2011), s. 7.
6
Ins. and shall be deemed to have been so ins. by the Constitution (Sixth Amdt.) Act,
1976 (84 of 1976), s. 4, (w.e.f.the 1st October, 1976).
7
Subs. and shall be deemed to have been so subs. ibid, for “Hazara”.
(ii) Zhob district, Loralai district (excluding Duki
Tehsil), Dalbandin Tehsil of Chagai district and
Marri and Bugti Tribal territories of Sibi district;
1
[*]
(c) ‘‘Federally  Administered Tribal Areas’’ includes –
(i) Tribal Areas, adjoining Peshawar district;
(ii) Tribal Areas adjoining Kohat district;
(iii) Tribal Areas adjoining Bannu district;
2
[(iiia) Tribal Areas adjoining Lakki Marwat district;]
(iv) Tribal Areas adjoining Dera Ismail Khan district;
2
[(iva) Tribal Areas adjoining Tank district;]
3
[(v) Bajaur Agency;
(va) Orakzai Agency;]
(vi) Mohmand Agency;
(vii) Khyber Agency;
(viii) Kurram Agency;
(ix) North Waziristan Agency; and
(x) South Waziristan Agency
4
[;and]
5
[(d) On the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-
fifth Amendment) Act, 2018, the areas mentioned in–
(i) paragraph (b),–
(a) in sub-paragraph (i), shall stand merged in
the Province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa; and
(b) in sub-paragraph (ii), shall stand merged in
the Province of Balochistan; and
(ii) paragraph (c), shall stand merged in the Province
of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.]
247.[Administration   of   Tribal   Areas]   omitted   by   the
Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2018 (37 of 2018).
144CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Omitted by the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amdt.) Act, 2018 (37 of 2018).
2
Inserted by the Constitution (Nineteenth Amendment) Act, 2011(1 of 2011), s. 7.
3
Subs. and shall be deemed to have been so subs. by the Constitution (Sixth Amdt.)
Act, 1976 (84 of 1976), s. 4, for the “original sub-paragraph (v),” (w.e.f.the 1st December,
1973).
4
Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amdt.) Act, 2018 (37 of 2018), s. 8 for full-stop.
5
Added ibid.
6
Omitted ibid., s. 9.
Protection to
President,
Governor,
Minister, etc.
Legal proceed-
ings.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN145
CH
APTER
4.–GE
NERAL
248.(1) The President, a Governor, the Prime Minister, a Federal
Minister, a Minister of State, the Chief Minister and a Provincial
Minister shall not be answerable to any court for the exercise of
powers and performance of functions of their respective offices
or for any act done or purported to be done in the exercise of
those powers and performance of those functions:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be construed as
restricting the right of any person to bring appropriate proceed-
ings against the Federation or a Province.
(2) No criminal proceedings whatsoever shall be institu-
ted or continued against the President or a Governor in any court
during his term of office.
(3) No process for the arrest or imprisonment of the
President or a Governor shall issue from any court during his
term of office.
(4) No civil proceedings in which relief is claimed against
the President or a Governor shall be instituted during his term of
office in respect of any thing done or not done by him in his per-
sonal capacity whether before or after he enters upon his office
unless, at least sixty days before the proceedings are instituted,
notice in writing has been delivered to him, or sent to him in the
manner prescribed by law, stating the nature of the proceedings,
the cause of action, the name, description and place of residence
of the party by whom the proceedings are to be instituted and the
relief which the party claims.
249.(1) Any legal proceedings which, but for the Constitution,
could have been brought by or against the Federation in respect
of a matter which, immediately before the commencing day, was
the   responsibility   of   the   Federation   and   has,   under   the
Constitution, become the responsibility of a Province, shall be
brought by or against the Province concerned; and if any such
legal proceedings were pending in any court immediately before
the commencing day then, in those proceedings, for the
Federation the Province concerned shall, as from that day, be
deemed to have been substituted.
Salaries,
allowances,
etc., of the
President, etc.
146CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
(2) Any legal proceedings which, but for the Constitution,
could have been brought by or against a Province in respect of a
matter which, immediately before the commencing day, was the
responsibility of the Province and has under the Constitution
become the responsibility of the Federation, shall be brought by
or against the Federation; and if any such legal proceedings were
pending in any court immediately before the commencing day
then, in those proceedings, for the Province the Federation shall,
as from that day, be deemed to have been substituted.
250.(1) Within two years from the commencing day, provision
shall be made by law for determining the salaries, allowances and
privileges of the President, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker and
a member of the National Assembly or a Provincial Assembly,
the Chairman and Deputy Chairman and a member of the Senate,
the Prime Minister, a Federal Minister, a Minister of State,
1
*  *
a Chief Minister, a Provincial Minister and the Chief Election
Commissioner.
(2) Until other provision is made by law,–
(a) the salaries,  allowances and privileges of the
President, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker or a mem-
ber of the National Assembly or a Provincial
Assembly, a Federal Minister, a Minister of State,
1
* *
a Chief Minister, a Provincial Minister and the Chief
Election Commissioner shall be same as the salaries,
allowances and privileges to which the President, the
Speaker or Deputy Speaker or member of the National
Assembly of Pakistan or a Provincial Assembly, a
Federal Minister, a Minister of State,
1
* * a Chief
Minister, a Provincial Minister or, as the case may be,
the Chief Election Commissioner was entitled imme-
diately before the commencing day; and
(b) the   salaries,   allowances   and   privileges   of   the
Chairman, the Deputy Chairman, the Prime Minister
and a member of the Senate shall be such as the
President may by Order determine.
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
The words and  comma “a Governor,” omitted by the Constitution (First Amdt.) Act,
1974 (33 of 1974), s. 13 (w.e.f.the 4th May, 1974).
National
language.
Special
provisions in
relation to
major ports
and aero-
dromes.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN147
(3) The salary, allowances and privileges of a person
holding office as–
(a) the President;
(b) the Chairman or Deputy Chairman;
(c) the Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the National
Assembly or  a Provincial Assembly;
(d) a Governor;
(e) the Chief Election Commissioner; or
(f) the Auditor-General ;
shall not be varied to his disadvantage during his term of
office.
(4) At any time when the Chairman or Speaker is acting
as President, he shall be entitled to the same salary, allowances
and privileges as a President but shall not exercise any of the
functions of the office of Chairman or Speaker or a member of
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora   (Parliament)]   or   be   entitled   to   salary,
allowances or privileges as Chairman, Speaker or such a member.
251. (1) The National language of Pakistan is Urdu, and
arrangements shall be made for its being used for official and
other purposes within fifteen years from the commencing day.
(2) Subject to clause (1), the English language may be
used for official purposes until arrangements are made for its
replacement by Urdu.
(3) Without prejudice to the status of the National
language, a Provincial Assembly may by law prescribe measures
for the teaching, promotion and use of a provincial language in
addition to the national language.
252.(1) Notwithstanding   anything   contained   in   the
Constitution or in any law, the President may, by public notifica-
tion, direct that, for a period not exceeding three months from a
specified date, a specified law, whether a Federal law or a
Provincial law, shall not apply to a specified major port or major
aerodrome, or shall apply to a specified major port or major
aerodrome subject to specified exceptions or modifications.
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Seefootnote 9 on page 5, supra.
Maximum
limits as to
property, etc.
Failure to
comply with
requirement as
to time does
not render an
act invalid.
Oath of Office.
148CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
(2) The giving of a direction under this Article in relation
to any law shall not affect the operation of the law prior to the
date specified in the direction.
253.(1)
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] may by law–
(a) prescribe the maximum limits as to property or any
class thereof which may be owned, held, possessed or
controlled by any person; and
(b) declare that any trade, business, industry or service
specified in such law shall be carried on or owned, to
the exclusion, complete or partial, of other persons, by
the Federal Government or a Provincial Government,
or   by   a   corporation   controlled   by   any   such
Government.
(2) Any law which permits a person to own beneficially
or possess beneficially an area of land greater than that which,
immediately before the commencing day, he could have lawfully
owned beneficially or possessed beneficially shall be invalid.
254.When any act or thing is required by the Constitution to be
done within a particular period and it is not done within that
period, the doing of the act or thing shall not be invalid or other-
wise ineffective by reason only that it was not done within that
period.
255.(1) An oath required to be made by a person under the
Constitution shall
2
[ preferably be made in Urdu or] a language
that is understood by that person.
(2) Where, under the Constitution, an oath is  required to
be made before a specified person and, for any reason, it is
impracticable for the oath to be made before that person, it may
be made before such other person as may be nominated by that
person.
(3) Where, under the Constitution, a person is required to
make an oath before he enters upon an office, he shall be deemed
to have entered upon the office on the day on which he makes the
oath.
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Seefootnote 9 on page 5, supra.
2
Subs. by P. O. No. 14 of 1985, Art. 2 and Sch., for “be made in”.
Private armies
forbidden.
Provision
relating to the
State of
Jammu and
Kashmir.
Government
of territories
outside
Provinces.
Awards.
Definitions.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN149
256.No private organisation capable of functioning as a military
organisation shall be formed, and any such organisation shall be
illegal.
257.When the people of the State of Jammu and Kashmir decide
to accede to Pakistan, the relationship between Pakistan and that
State shall be determined in accordance with the wishes of the
people of that State.
258.Subject   to   the   Constitution,   until
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora
(Parliament)] by law otherwise provides, the President may, by
Order, make provision for peace and good government of any
part of Pakistan not forming part of a Province.
259.(1) No citizen shall accept any title, honour or decoration
from any foreign State except with the approval of the Federal
Government.
(2) No title, honour or decoration shall be conferred by
the Federal Government or any Provincial Government on any
citizen, but the President may award decorations in recognition of
gallantry
2
[,meritorious service in the Armed Forces]
3
[,academic
distinction or distinction in the field of sports or nursing], as
provided by Federal law.
(3) All titles, honours and decorations awarded to citizens
by any authority in Pakistan before the commencing day other-
wise than in recognition of gallantry
4
[, meritorious service in the
Armed Forces] or academic distinction shall stand annulled.
C
HAPTER5.–INTERPRETATION
260.(1) In the Constitution, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following expressions have the meaning hereby
respectively assigned to them, that is to say,–
''Act of
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)]'' means an Act
passed by
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] or the
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Seefootnote 9 on page 5, supra.
2
Ins. by the Constitution (First Amdt.) Act, 1974 (33 of 1974), s. 14, (w.e.f.the 4th
May, 1974).
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Third Amdt.) Order, 1981 (P. O. No. 12 of 1981), Art. 2,
for "or academic distinction".
4
Ins. and shall be deemed always to have been so ins. by Act, 33 of 1974, s. 14, (w.e.f.
the 4th May, 1974).
150CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
National Assembly and assented  to,  or deemed to
have been assented to, by the President;
''Act of Provincial Assembly'' means an Act passed by
the Provincial Assembly of a Province and assented
to, or deemed to have been assented to, by the
Governor;
"agricultural income" means agricultural income as
defined for the purposes of the law relating to income-
tax;
''Article'' means Article of the Constitution;
''borrow'' includes the raising of money by the grant
of  annuities,  and  ''loans''   shall   be  construed
accordingly;
''Chairman'' means the Chairman of the Senate and,
except in Article 49, includes a person acting as
Chairman of the Senate;
1
[''Chief Justice'', in relation to the Supreme Court or a
High Court, includes the Judge for the time being act-
ing as Chief Justice of the Court;]
''citizen'' means a citizen of Pakistan as defined by
law;
''clause'' means clause of the Article in which it occurs;
2
*     *     *     *     *     *     *
"corporation tax'' means any tax on income that is
payable by companies and in respect of which the fol-
lowing conditions apply:–
(a) the tax is not chargeable in respect of agricultural
income;
(b) no deduction in respect of the tax paid by companies
is, by any law which may apply to the tax, authorised
to be made from dividends payable by the companies
to individuals;
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Ins. by the Constitution (First Amdt.) Act, 1974 (33 of 1974), s. 15.
2
The “definition of Expression consultation” omitted by the Constitution (Eighteenth
Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 92.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN151
(c) no provision exists for taking the tax so paid into
account in computing for the purposes of income-tax
the total income of individual receiving such divi-
dends, or in computing the income-tax payable by, or
refundable to, such individuals;
''debt'' includes any liability in respect of any obligation to
repay capital sums by way of annuities and any liabil-
ity under any guarantee, and ''debt charges'' shall be
construed accordingly;
''estate duty'' means a duty assessed on, or by reference to,
the value of property passing upon death;
''existing law'' has the same meaning as in clause (7) of
Article 268;
''Federal law'' means a law made by or under the authority
of
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)];
‘‘financial year’’ means a year commencing on the first day
of July;
‘‘goods’’ includes all materials, commodities and articles;
‘‘Governor’’ means the Governor of a Province and
includes any person for the time being acting as the
Governor of a Province;
‘‘guarantee’’ includes any obligation undertaken before the
commencing day to make payments in the event of the
profits of an undertaking falling short of a specified
amount;
‘‘House’’ means the Senate or the National Assembly;
‘‘Joint sitting’’ means a joint sitting of the two Houses;
‘‘Judge’’ in relation to the Supreme Court or a High Court,
includes the Chief Justice of the Court and also
includes–
(a) in relation to the Supreme Court, a person who is
acting as a Judge of the Court; and
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Seefootnote 9 on page 5, supra.
(b) in relation to the High Court, a person who is an
Additional Judge of the Court;
"members of the Armed Forces" does not include persons
who are not, for the time being, subject to any law relat-
ing to the members of the Armed Forces;
"net proceeds" means, in relation to any tax or duty, the pro-
ceeds thereof, reduced by the cost of collection, as ascer-
tained and certified by the Auditor-General;
"oath" includes affirmation;
"Part" means Part of the Constitution;
"pension" means a pension, whether contributory or not, of
any kind whatsoever payable to, or in respect of, any per-
son and includes retired pay so payable, a gratuity so
payable, and any sum or sums so payable by way of the
return, with or without interest thereon or any addition
thereto, of subscriptions to a provident fund;
"person" includes any body politic or corporate;
"President" means the President of Pakistan and includes a
person for the time being acting as, or performing the
functions of, the President of Pakistan and, as respects
anything required to be done under the Constitution
before the commencing day, the President under the
Interim Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan;
"Property" includes any right, title or interest in property,
movable or immovable, and any means and instruments
of production;
"Provincial law" means a law made by or under the autho-
rity of the Provincial Assembly;
‘‘remuneration’’ includes salary and pension;
"Schedule" means Schedule to the Constitution;
152CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN153
"security of Pakistan" includes the safety, welfare, stability
and integrity of Pakistan and of each part of Pakistan,
but shall not include public safety as such;
"service of Pakistan" means any service, post or office in
connection with the affairs of the Federation or of a
Province, and includes an All-Pakistan Service, service
in the Armed Forces and any other service declared to be
a   service   of   Pakistan   by   or   under Act   of
1
[Majlis-e-
Shoora (Parliament)] or of a Provincial Assembly, but
does not include service as Speaker, Deputy Speaker,
Chairman, Deputy Chairman, Prime Minister, Federal
Minister, Minister of State, Chief Minister, Provincial
Minister,
2
[Attorney-General,
3
[Advocate-General,]
Parliamentary Secretary] or
4
[Chairman or member of a
Law Commission, Chairman or member of the Council
of   Islamic   Ideology,   Special   Assistant   to   the   Prime
Minister,   Adviser   to   the   Prime   Minister,   Special
Assistant   to   a   Chief   Minister,   Adviser   to   a   Chief
Minister]   or   member   of   a   House   or   a   Provincial
Assembly;
"Speaker" means the Speaker of the National Assembly or a
Provincial Assembly, and includes any person acting as
the Speaker of the Assembly;
"taxation" includes the imposition of any tax or duty, whether
general, local or special, and "tax" shall be construed
accordingly;
"tax on income" includes a tax in the nature of an excess
profits tax or a business profits tax.
1
Seefootnote 9 on page 5, supra.
2
Ins. by the Constitution (First Amdt.) Act, 1974 (33 of 1974), s. 15,  (w.e.f. the 4th
May, 1974).
3
Ins. by the Constitution (Fifth Amdt.) Act, 1976 (62 of 1976), s. 16,  (w.e.f.the 13th
September, 1976).
4
Ins. by the Constitution (Sixth Amdt.) Act, 1976 (84 of 1976), s. 5, (w.e.f.the 31st
December, 1976).
Person acting
in office not to
be regarded as
successor to
previous occu-
pant of office,
etc.
Gregorian cal-
endar to be
used.
Gender and
number.
154CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
(2) In   the   Constitution   "Act   of
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora
(Parliament)]" or "Federal law" or "Act of Provincial Assembly"
or "Provincial law" shall include an Ordinance promulgated by
the President or, as the case may be, a Governor.
2
[(3) In the Constitution and all enactments and other legal
instruments, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or
context,–
(a) "Muslim" means a person who believes in the unity
and oneness of Almighty Allah, in the absolute and
unqualified finality of the Prophethood of Muhammad
(peace be upon him), the last of the prophets, and does
not believe in, or recognize as a prophet or religious
reformer, any person who claimed or claims to be a
prophet, in any sense of the word or of any description
whatsoever, after Muhammad (peace be upon him);
and
(b) "non-Muslim" means a person who is not a Muslim
and   includes   a   person   belonging   to   the   Christian,
Hindu, Sikh, Budhist or Parsi community, a person of
the Quadiani group or the Lahori group (who call
themselves ‘Ahmadis’ or by any other name), or a
Bahai, and a person belonging to any of the scheduled
castes.]
261.For the purposes of the Constitution, a person who acts in
an office shall not be regarded as the successor to the person who
held that office before him or as the predecessor to the person
who holds that office after him.
262.For the purposes of the Constitution, periods of time shall
be reckoned according to the Gregorian calendar.
263.In the Constitution,–
1
Seefootnote 9 on page 5, supra.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Third Amdt.) Order, 1985 (P. O. No. 24 of 1985), Art. 6,
for ‘‘clause (3)’’, which was previously added by Act 49 of 1974, s. 3, (w.e.f.the 17th
September, 1974).
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN155
(a) words importing the masculine gender shall be taken
to include females; and
(b) words in the singular shall include the plural, and
words in the plural shall include the singular.
264.Where a law is repealed, or is deemed to have been
repealed, by, under, or by virtue of the Constitution, the repeal
shall not, except as otherwise provided in the Constitution,–
(a) revive anything not in force or existing at the time at
which the repeal takes effect;
(b) affect the previous operation of the law or anything
duly done or suffered under the law;
(c) affect   any   right,   privilege,   obligation   or   liability
acquired, accrued or incurred under the law;
(d) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred
in respect of any offence committed against the law;
or
(e) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in
respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liabi-
lity, penalty, forfeiture or punishment;
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be
instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture
or   punishment   may   be   imposed,   as   if   the   law   had   not   been
repealed.
C
HAPTER6.–TITLE, COMMENCEMENT ANDREPEAL
265.(1) This Constitution shall be known as the Constitution of
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.
(2) Subject to clauses (3) and (4), the Constitution shall
come into force on the fourteenth day of August, one thousand
nine hundred and seventy-three or on such earlier day as the
President may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint, in
the Constitution referred to as the "commencing day".
(3) The Constitution shall, to the extent necessary–
Effect of
repeal of laws.
Title of
Constitution
and com-
mencement.
156CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
(a) for the Constitution of the first Senate;
(b) for the first meeting of a House or a joint sitting to be
held;
(c) for   the   election   of   the   President   and   the   Prime
Minister to be held ; and
(d) to enable any other thing to be done which, for the
purposes   of   the   Constitution,   it   is   necessary   to   do
before the commencing day,
come into force upon the enactment of the Constitution, but the
person elected as President or Prime Minister shall not enter upon
his office before the commencing day.
(4) Where by the Constitution a power is conferred to
make rules or to issue orders with respect to the enforcement of
any provision thereof, or with respect to the establishment of any
court or office, or the appointment of any Judge or officer there-
under, or with respect to the person by whom, or the time when,
or the place where, or the manner in which, anything is to be done
under any such provision, then that power may be exercised at
any time between the enactment of the Constitution and its com-
mencement.
266.The   Interim   Constitution   of   the   Islamic   Republic   of
Pakistan, together with the Acts and President’s Orders making
omissions from, additions to, modifications of, or amendments
in, that Constitution is hereby repealed.
C
HAPTER7.–TRANSITIONAL
267.(1) At any time before the commencing day or before the
expiration   of   three   months   from   the   commencing   day,   the
President may, for the purpose of removing any difficulties, or for
bringing the provisions of the Constitution into effective opera-
tion, by Order, direct that the provisions of the Constitution shall,
during such period as may be specified in the Order, have effect,
subject to such adaptations, whether by way of modification,
addition or omission, as he may deem to be necessary or expedi-
ent.
(2) An Order made under clause (1) shall be laid before
both Houses without undue delay, and shall remain in force until
Repeal.
Power of
President to
remove diffi-
culties.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN157
a resolution disapproving it is passed by each House or, in case
of disagreement between the two Houses, until such resolution is
passed at a joint sitting.
1
[267A.   If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010, here-
inafter in this Article referred to as the Act, or for bringing the
provisions of the Act into effective operation, the matter shall be
laid before both Houses in a joint sitting which may by a  resolu-
tion direct that the provisions of the Act shall, during such period
as may be specified in the resolution, have effect, subject to such
adaptations, whether by way of modification, addition or omis-
sion, as may be deemed necessary or expedient:
Provided that this power shall be available for a period of
one year from the commencement of the Act.
267B.For removal of doubt it is hereby declared that Article
152A   omitted   and   Articles   179   and   195   substituted   by   the
Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 2003 (Act No. III of
2003), notwithstanding its repeal, shall be deemed always to have
been so omitted and substituted.]
268.(1) Except as provided by this Article, all existing laws
shall, subject to the Constitution, continue in force, so far as
applicable   and   with   the   necessary   adaptations,   until   altered,
repealed or amended by the appropriate Legislature.
2
* * * * * * *
(3) For   the   purpose   of   bringing   the   provisions   of   any
existing law into accord with the provisions of the Constitution
(other than Part II of the Constitution), the President may by
Order, within a period of two years from the commencing day,
make such adaptations, whether by way of modification, addition
or omission, as he may deem to be necessary or expedient, and
any such Order may be made so as to have effect from such day,
not being a day earlier than the commencing day, as may be
specified in the Order.
(4) The   President   may
3
authorise   the   Governor   of   a
Province to exercise, in relation to the Province, the powers con-
ferred on the President by clause (3) in respect of laws relating to
matters with respect to which the Provincial Assembly has power
to make laws.
1
New Articles 267A and 267B ins. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010
(10 of 2010), s. 93.
2
Clause (2) omitted ibid.,s. 94.
3
For such authorization, seeGaz. of Pak., 1973, Ext., Pt. II, p. 2001.
Continuance in
force, and
adaptation of
certain laws.
Power to
remove diffi-
culties.
Removal of
doubt.
158CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
(5) The powers exercisable under clauses (3) and (4) shall
be   subject   to   the   provisions   of   an   Act   of   the   appropriate
Legislature.
(6) Any court, tribunal or authority required or empow-
ered to enforce an existing law shall, notwithstanding that no
adaptations have been made in such law by an Order made under
clause (3) or clause (4), construe the law with all such adaptations
as are necessary to bring it into accord with the provisions of the
Constitution.
(7) In this Article, "existing laws" means all laws (includ-
ing   Ordinances,   Orders-in-Council,   Orders,   rules,   bye-laws,
regulations and Letters Patent constituting a High Court, and any
notifications and other legal instruments having the force of law)
in force in Pakistan or any part thereof, or having extra-territorial
validity, immediately before the commencing day.
Explanation.–In this Article, "in force", in relation to any
law, means having effect as law whether or not the law has been
brought into operation.
269.(1)  All Proclamations, President’s Orders, Martial Law
Regulations,   Martial   Law   Orders   and   all   other   laws   made
between   the   twentieth   day   of   December,   one   thousand   nine
hundred and seventy-one and the twentieth day of April, one
thousand nine hundred and seventy-two (both days inclusive), are
hereby declared notwithstanding any judgement of any court, to
have been validly made by competent authority and shall not be
called in question in any court on any ground whatsoever.
(2) All orders made, proceedings taken and acts done by
any authority, or by any person, which were made, taken or done,
or purported to have been made, taken or done, between the
twentieth   day   of   December,   one   thousand   nine   hundred   and
seventy-one, and the twentieth day of April, one thousand nine
hundred and seventy-two (both days inclusive), in exercise of the
powers   derived   from   any   President’s   Orders,   Martial   Law
Regulations,   Martial   Law   Orders,   enactments,   notifications,
rules, orders or bye-laws, or in execution of any orders made or
sentences passed by any authority in the exercise or purported
exercise   of   powers   as   aforesaid,   shall,   notwithstanding   any
judgement of any court, be deemed to be and always to have been
validly made, taken or done and shall not be called in question in
any court on any ground whatsoever.
(3) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie in any court
against any authority or any person for or on account of or in
respect of any order made, proceedings taken or act done whether
Validation of
laws, acts, etc.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN159
in the exercise or purported exercise of the powers referred to in
clause (2) or in execution of or in compliance with orders made
or sentences passed in exercise or purported exercise of such
powers.
270.(1)
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] may by law made in
the manner prescribed for legislation for a matter in Part I of the
Federal Legislative List validate all Proclamations, President’s
Orders, Martial Law Regulations, Martial Law Orders and other
laws made between the twenty-fifth day of March, one thousand
nine   hundred   and   sixty-nine,   and   the   nineteenth   day   of
December, one thousand nine hundred and seventy-one (both
days inclusive).
(2) Notwithstanding   a   judgement   of   any   court,   a   law
made by
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] under clause (1) shall
not be questioned in any court on any ground, whatsoever.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of clause (1), and a
judgement of any court to the contrary, for a period of two years
from the commencing day, the validity of all such instruments as
are referred to in clause (1) shall not be called in question before
any court on any ground whatsoever.
(4) All orders, made, proceedings taken, and acts done by
any authority, or any person, which were made, taken or done, or
purported to have been made, taken or done, between the twen-
ty-fifth day of March, one thousand nine hundred and sixty-nine
and nineteenth day of December, one thousand nine hundred and
seventy-one (both days inclusive), in exercise of powers derived
from any President’s Orders, Martial Law Regulations, Martial
Law Orders, enactments, notifications, rules, orders or bye-laws,
or in execution of any order made or sentence passed by any
authority in the exercise or purported exercise of power as afore-
said   shall,   notwithstanding   any   judgement   of   any   court,   be
deemed to be and always to have been validly made, taken or
done, so however that any such order, proceeding or act may be
declared invalid by
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] at any time
within   a   period   of   two   years   from   the   commencing   day   by
resolution of both Houses, or in case of disagreement between the
two Houses, by such resolution passed at a joint sitting and
shall not be called in question before any court on any ground,
whatsoever.
2
[
3
[270A.(1)  The Proclamation of the fifth day of July, 1977, all
President’s   Orders,   Ordinances,   Martial   Law   Regulations,
1
Seefootnote 9 on page 5, supra.
2
Articles 270A and 270B ins. by P. O. No. 14 of 1985, Art. 2 and Sch.
3
Article 270A subs. by the Constitution (Eighth Amdt.) Act, 1985 (18 of 1985) s. 19,
for ‘‘Art. 270A’’ (w.e.f.30-12-1985) videS.R.O. No. 1279(1)/85, dated 29-12-85 read
with Proclamation of withdrawal of Martial Law, dated 30-12-85, seeGaz. of Pak., 1985,
Ext., Pt. 1. pp. 431-432.
Temporary val-
idation of cer-
tain laws, etc.
Affirmation of
President’s
Orders, etc.
160CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
Martial Law Orders, including the Referendum Order, 1984 (P.O.
No. 11 of 1984),
1
*   *   * the Revival of the Constitution of 1973
Order, 1985 (P.O. No. 14 of 1985), the Constitution (Second
Amendment) Order, 1985 (P.O. No. 20 of 1985), the Constitution
(Third Amendment) Order, 1985 (P.O. No. 24 of 1985), and all
other laws made between the fifth day of July, 1977, and the date
on   which   this Article   comes   into   force   are   hereby   affirmed,
adopted and declared, notwithstanding any judgement of any
court, to have been validly made by competent authority and,
notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, shall not
be called in question in any court on any ground whatsoever :
Provided that a President’s Order, Martial Law Regulation
or Martial Law Order made after the thirtieth day of September,
1985, shall be confined only to making such provisions as facili-
tate, or are incidental to, the revocation of the Proclamation of the
fifth day of July, 1977.
(2) All orders made, proceedings taken and acts done by
any authority or by any person, which were made, taken or done,
or purported to have been made, taken or done, between the fifth
day of July, 1977, and the date on which this Article comes into
force, in exercise of the powers derived from any Proclamation,
President’s   Orders,   Ordinances,   Martial   Law   Regulations,
Martial Law Orders, enactments, notifications, rules, orders or
bye-laws, or in execution of or in compliance with any order
made or sentence passed by any authority in the exercise or
purported exercise of powers as aforesaid, shall, notwithstanding
any judgement of any court, be deemed to be and always to have
been validly made, taken or done and shall not be called in
question in any court on any ground whatsoever.
(3) All   President’s   Orders,   Ordinances,   Martial   Law
Regulations,   Martial   Law   Orders,   enactments,   notifications,
rules, orders, or bye-laws, in force immediately before the date
on which this Article comes into force shall continue in force
until altered, repealed or amended by competent authority.
Explanation.–In   this   clause,   ‘‘competent   authority’’
means,––
(a) in respect of President’s Orders, Ordinances, Martial
Law   Regulations,   Martial   Law   Orders   and   enact-
ments, the appropriate Legislature; and
1
Certain words omitted by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of
2010), s. 95.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN161
(b) in respect of notifications, rules, orders and bye-laws,
the authority in which the power to make, alter, repeal
or amend the same vests under the law.
(4) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall
lie in any court against any authority or any person, for or on
account of or in respect of any order made, proceedings taken or
act done whether in the exercise or purported exercise of the
powers referred to in clause (2) or in execution of or in compli-
ance with orders made or sentences passed in exercise or pur-
ported exercise of such powers.
(5) For the purposes of clauses (1), (2) and (4), all orders
made, proceedings taken, acts done or purporting to be made,
taken or done by any authority or person shall be deemed to have
been made, taken or done in good faith and for the purpose
intended to be served thereby.
1
[(6) The laws referred to in clause (1) may be amended by
the appropriate Legislature in the manner provided for amend-
ment of such laws.]
2
[270AA. (1) The Proclamation of Emergency of the fourteenth
day of October, 1999, the Provisional Constitution Order No. 1 of
1999, the Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2000 (No. 1 of 2000),
Chief Executive’s Order No. 12 of 2002, Chief Executive’s Order
No.   19   of   2002,   the   amendments   made   in   the   Constitution
through the Legal Framework Order, 2002 (Chief Executive’s
Order No. 24 of 2002), the Legal Framework (Amendment) Order,
2002 (Chief Executive’s Order No. 29 of 2002) and   the   Legal
Framework   (Second   Amendment)   Order,   2002   (Chief
Executive’s Order No. 32 of 2002), notwithstanding any judge-
ment of any court including the Supreme Court or a High Court,
are hereby declared as having been made without lawful author-
ity and of no legal effect.
(2) Except as provided in clause (1) and subject to the
provisions   of   the   Constitution   (Eighteenth   Amendment)   Act,
2010, all laws including President’s Orders, Acts, Ordinances,
Chief Executive’s Orders, regulations, enactments, notifications,
rules,   orders   or   bye-laws   made   between   the   twelfth   day   of
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 95, for “clause (6)”.
2
Subs. ibid., for “Article 270AA” s. 96.
Declaration
and continu-
ance of laws
etc.
162CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
October, one thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine and the thir-
ty-first day of December, two thousand and three (both days
inclusive) and still in force shall, continue to be in force until
altered, repealed or amended by the competent authority.
Explanation.–For the purposes of clause (2) and clause (6),
“competent authority” means,–
(a) in respect of Presidents’ Orders, Ordinances, Chief
Executive’s Orders and all other laws, the appropriate
Legislature; and
(b) in respect of notifications, rules, orders and bye-laws,
the authority in which the power to make, alter, repeal
or amend the same vests under the law.
(3) Notwithstanding   anything   contained   in   the
Constitution or clause (1), or judgement of any court including
the Supreme Court or a High Court,––
(a) Judges   of   the   Supreme   Court,   High   Courts   and
Federal Shariat Court who were holding the office of
a Judge or were appointed as such, and had taken oath
under the Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2000 (1 of
2000), shall be deemed to have continued to hold the
office as a Judge or to have been appointed as such, as
the case may be, under the Constitution, and such con-
tinuance or appointment, shall have effect according-
ly.
(b) Judges   of   the   Supreme   Court,   High   Courts   and
Federal Shariat Court who not having been given or
taken oath under the Oath of Office of (Judges) Order,
2000 (1 of 2000), and ceased to hold the office of a
Judge shall, for the purposes of pensionary benefits
only,   be   deemed   to   have   continued   to   hold   office
under the Constitution till their date of superannua-
tion.
(4) All   orders   made,   proceedings   taken,   appointments
made, including secondments and deputations, and acts done by
any authority, or by any person, which were made, taken or done,
or purported to have been made, taken or done, between the
twelfth day of October, one thousand nine hundred and ninety-
nine, and the thirty first day of December, two thousand and three
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN163
(both days inclusive), in exercise of the powers derived from any
authority or laws mentioned in clause (2), or in execution of or in
compliance with any orders made or sentences passed by any
authority in the exercise or purported exercise of powers as afore-
said, shall, notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), be
deemed to be valid and shall not be called in question in any court
or forum on any ground whatsoever.
(5) No   suit,   prosecution   or   other   legal   proceedings,
including writ petitions, shall lie in any court or forum against
any authority or any person, for or on account of or in respect of
any order made, proceedings taken or act done whether in the
exercise or purported exercise of the powers referred to in clause
(2) or clause (4) or in execution of or in compliance with orders
made or sentences passed in exercise or purported exercise of
such powers.
(6) Notwithstanding   omission   of   the   Concurrent
Legislative   List   by   the   Constitution   (Eighteenth Amendment)
Act, 2010, all laws with respect, to any of the matters enumerat-
ed in the said List (including Ordinances, Orders, rules, bye-laws,
regulations and notifications and other legal instruments having
the force of law) in force in Pakistan or any part thereof, or hav-
ing   extra-territorial   operation,   immediately   before   the   com-
mencement of the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act,
2010, shall continue to remain in force until altered, repealed or
amended by the competent authority.
(7) Notwithstanding   anything   contained   in   the
Constitution, all taxes and fees levied under any law in force
immediately   before   the   commencement   of   the   Constitution
(Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010, shall continue to be levied
until they are varied or abolished by an Act of the appropriate leg-
islature.
(8) On the omission of the Concurrent Legislative List,
the process of devolution of the matters mentioned in the said
List to the Provinces shall be completed by the thirtieth day of
June, two thousand and eleven.
(9) For purposes of the devolution process under clause
(8), the Federal Government shall constitute an Implementation
Commission as it may deem fit within fifteen days of the com-
mencement of the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act,
2010.]
Elections to be
deemed to be
held under
Constitution.
General
Elections
2008.
First National
Assembly.
164CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN