[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 462N: Recovery  of  outstanding  amounts  from  persons  involved  in  section  462H  to  462M

Offences. Any person said to commit  or to have  committed  the  offence  as  mentioned  in section 462H  to 462M shall
also  be  liable  to  pay  an  amount equivalent  to  the  financial  loss  caused  to  the  Government  or  the  distribution
companies concerned. Any such outstanding amount of penalties or fines imposed under this Chapter shall be
recoverable as arrears of land revenue.
462O. Cognizance. (1) The Court shall try an offence punishable under this Chapter.
4
[462O.  Cognizance.—(1)  The  offences  punishable  under  this  Chapter  shall  be  cognizable  however  the
police shall not take cognizance of an offence under this Chapter except where information of an offence under
this  Chapter  is  provided  to  the  police  in  writing  by  a  duly  authorized  officer  (not  below  Grade  17)  of  the
Government or by a person duly authorized by a Chief Executive Officer of a power distribution company as the
case may be.]
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 or any other law for the time
being in force, the Court shall not take cognizance of an offence under this Chapter except on a complaint made,
with reasons to be recorded in writing along with full particulars of the offence committed under this Chapter, by
duly authorized officer (not below Grade 17) of the Government or the distribution company, as the case may be.
462P.  Overriding  effect.— The  provisions  of  this Chapter  shall  have  effect  notwithstanding  anything
contained in any other law for the time being in force."]
CHAPTER XVIII
OF OFFEENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO
TRADE OR PROPERTY MARKS
463. Forgery. Whoever makes any false document or part of a document, with intent to cause damage or
injury, to the public or to any person, or to support any claim or title, or to cause any person to part with property,
or to enter into any express or implied contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be committed,
commits forgery.
4
Substitute by Ordinance No. VI of 2023, S. 2, dated 14
th
December, 2023
464. Making a false document. A person is said to make a false document
Firstly. Who dishonestly or fraudulently makes, signs, seals or executes a document or part of a
document, or makes any mark denoting the execution of a document with the intention of causing it to be believed
that such document or part of a document was made, signed, sealed or executed by or by the authority of a person
by whom or by whose authority he knows that it was not made, signed, sealed or executed, or at a time at which
he knows that it was not made, signed, sealed or executed ; or
Secondly. Who, without lawful authority, dishonestly or fraudulently, by cancellation or otherwise, alters
a document in any material part thereof, after it has been made or executed either by himself or by any other
person, whether such person be living or dead at the time of such alteration ; or
Thirdly. Who dishonestly or fraudulently causes any person to sign, seal, execute or alter a document,
knowing that such person by reason of unsoundness of mind or intoxication cannot, or that by reason of deception
practised upon him he does not know the contents of the document or the nature of the alteration.
Illustrations
(a) A has a  letter  of  credit  upon  B  for  rupees  10,000, written by Z. A,  in  order  to  defraud B, adds  a
cipher to the 10,000 and makes the sum 1,00,000, intending that it may be believed by B that Z so
wrote the letter. A has committed forgery.
(b) A, without Z’s authority, affixes Z's seal to a document purporting to be a conveyance of an estate
from  Z  to  A, with the intention of  selling the estate  to  B and thereby  of obtaining from  B the
purchase-money. A has committed forgery.
(c) A picks up a cheque on a banker signed by B, payable to bearer, but without any sum having been
inserted  in the cheque.  A  fraudulently  fills  up the cheque  by inserting the sum  of  ten thousand
rupees. A commits forgery.
(d) A leaves with B, his agent, a cheque on a banker, signed by A, without inserting the sum payable and
authorizes B  to  fill  up the cheque  by inserting a  sum not exceeding  ten thousand rupees  for the
purpose  of making certain payments. B  fraudulently  fills  up the cheque  by inserting the sum  of
twenty thousand rupees. B commits forgery.
(e) A draws a bill of exchange on himself in the name of B without B’s authority, intending to discount it
as a genuine bill with a banker and intending to take up the bill on its maturity. Here, as A draws the
bill with intent to deceive the banker by leading him to suppose that he had the security of B, and
thereby to discount the bill, A is guilty of forgery.
(f) Z’s will contains these words-"I direct that all my remaining property be equally divided between A,
B and C." A dishonestly scratches out B’s name, intending that it may be  believed that the whole
was left to himself and C. A has committed forgery.
(g) A endorses a Government promissory note and makes it payable to Z or his order by writing on the
bill the words “Pay to Z or his order” and signing the endorsement. B dishonestly erases the words
“Pay to Z or his order” and thereby converts the special endorsement into a blank endorsement. B
commits forgery.
(h) A  sells and conveys  an  estate  to Z. A  afterwards,  in  order  to  defraud  Z  of his estate  executes  a
conveyance of the same estate to B, dated six months earlier than the date of the conveyance to Z,
intending it to be believed that he had conveyed the estate to B before he conveyed it to Z. A has
committed forgery.
(i) Z dictates his will to A. A intentionally writes down a different legatee from the  legatee named by Z,
and by representing to Z that he has prepared the will according to his instructions, induces Z to sign
the will. A has committed forgery.
(j) A writes a letter and signs it with B’s name without B's authority, certifying that A is a man of good
character and in distressed circumstances from unforeseen misfortune, intending by means of such
letter to obtain alms from Z and other persons. Here, as A made a false document in order to induce
Z to part with property. A has committed forgery.
(k) A without B’s authority writes a letter and signs it in B’s name certifying to A’s character, intending
thereby to obtain employment under Z. A has committed forgery inasmuch as he intended to deceive
Z by the forged certificate, and thereby to induce Z to enter into an express or implied contract for
service.
Explanation 1. A man’s signature of his own name may amount to forgery.
Illustrations
(a) A signs his own name to a bill of exchange, intending that it may be believed that the bill was  drawn
by another person of the same name. A has committed forgery.
(b) A writes the word “accepted” on a piece of paper and signs it with Z’s name, in order that B may
afterwards write on the paper a bill of exchange drawn by B upon Z, and negotiate the bill as though
it had been accepted by Z. A is guilty of forgery ; and if B, knowing the fact, draws the bill upon the
paper pursuant to A’s intention, B is also guilty of forgery.
(c) A picks up a bill of exchange payable to the order of a different person of the same name. A endorses
the bill in his own name, intending to cause it to be believed that it was endorsed by the person to
whose order it was payable, here A has committed forgery.
(d) A purchases an estate sold under execution of a decree against B. B after the seizure of the estate,
in collusion with Z, executes a lease of the estate to Z at a nominal rent and for a long period and
dates the lease six months prior to the seizure, with intent to defraud A, and to cause it to be believed
that the lease was granted before the seizure. B,  though he executes the lease  in his own name,
commits forgery by antedating it.
(e) A,  a trader, in  anticipation  of insolvency, lodges  effects with B  for A’s benefit, and with intent to
defraud his creditors ; and in  order  to give a  colour  to the transaction, writes a  promissory note
binding himself to pay to B a sum for value received, and antedates the note, intending that it may
be believed to have been made before A was on the point of insolvency. A has committed forgery
under the first head of the definition.
Explanation 2. The making of a false document in the name of a fictitious person, intending it to be
believed that the document was made by a real person, or in the name of a deceased person, intending it to be
believed that the document was made by the person in his life time, may amount to forgery.
Illustration
A draws a bill of exchange upon a fictitious person, and fraudulently accepts the bill in the name
of such fictitious person with intent to negotiate it. A commits forgery.
465. Punishment for forgery. Whoever commits forgery shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
466. Forgery  of  record  of  Court  or  of  public  register,  etc. Whoever forges a  document,
purporting  to  be  a  record  or  proceeding  of  or in a  Court  of  Justice,  or  a  register  of  birth,  baptism,
marriage or burial, or a register kept by a public servant as such, or a certificate or document purporting
to be made by a public servant in his official capacity, or an authority to institute or defend a suit, or to
take any proceedings therein, or to confess judgment, or a power of attorney, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
467. Forgery for valuable security will, etc. Whoever forges a document which purports to be a
valuable security or a will, or an authority to adopt a son, or which purports to give authority to any
person  to  make  or  transfer  any  valuable security, or  to  receive  the  principal,  interest  or  dividends
thereon, or to receive or deliver any money, moveable property, or valuable security, or any  document
purporting to be an acquittance or receipt acknowledging the payment of money, or an acquittance or
receipt  for  the  delivery  of  any  moveable  property  or  valuable security, shall  be  punished with
1
[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
468. Forgery  for  purpose  of  cheating. Whoever commits forgery, intending  that  the  document
forged shall  be  used  for  the  purpose  of  cheating,  shall  be  punished with  imprisonment of  either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
469. Forgery for purpose of harming reputation. Whoever commits forgery, intending that the
document forged shall harm the reputation of any party, or knowing that it is likely to be used for that
purpose,  shall  be  punished with  imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
470. Forged  document. A  false  document  made wholly or in part  by  forgery is designated “a
forged document” .
471. Using as genuine a forged document. Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly uses as genuine
any document which he knows or has reason to believe to be a forged document, shall be punished in
the same manner as if he had forged such document.
472. Making  or  possessing  counterfeit  seal,  etc.,  with  intent  to  commit  forgery  punishable
under section 467. Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an
impression, intending  that  the same shall  be  used  for  the  purpose  of committing any  forgery  which
would be punishable under section 467 of this Code, or, with such intent, has in his possession any such
seal,  plate  or  other  instrument,  knowing  the same to  be  counterfeit,  shall  be  punishable with
1
[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
473. Making  or  possessing  counterfeit  seal,  etc.,  with  intent  to  commit  forgery  punishable
otherwise. Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an impression,
intending  that  the same shall  be  used  for  the  purpose  of committing any  forgery  which would be
punishable  under  any  section  of  this  chapter  other  than  section  467, or, with such  intent,  has in his
possession any  such  seal,  plate  or  other  instrument,  knowing  the same to  be  counterfeit,  shall  be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.