[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 495: Same offence with concealment of former marriage from person with whom subsequent

marriage is contracted. Whoever commits the offence defined in the last preceding section having concealed
from the person with whom the subsequent marriage is  contracted, the fact  of the former  marriage, shall  be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a, term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
496. Marriage  ceremony  fraudulently  gone  through  without  lawful  marriage. Whoever,
dishonestly or with a fraudulent intention, goes through the ceremony of being married, knowing that he is not
thereby lawfully married, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
2
[496A. Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a woman.
Whoever takes or
entices away any woman with intent that she may have illicit intercourse with any person, or conceals or  detains
with that intent any woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
496B. Fornication. (1) A man, and woman not married to each other are said to commit fornication if
they willfully have sexual intercourse with one another.
1
Sub.by ord.86 of 2002,S.2 and sch-I.
2
Ins by Act. VI of 2006,S.6
(2) Whoever commits fornication shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five
years and shall also be liable to fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees.
496C. Punishment for false accusation of fornication. Whoever brings or levels or gives evidence of
false charge of fornication against any person, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to five years and shall also be liable to fine not-exceeding ten thousand rupees:
Provided that Presiding  Officer  of  a  Court  dismissing  a complaint under  section  203C  of the Code  of
Criminal Procedure,  1898 and after providing the accused  an  opportunity  to  show  cause  if  satisfied that an
offence under this section has  been committed shall not require any further proof and shall forthwith proceed
to pass the sentence.]
497. [Adultery.] Rep. by the Offences of Zina (Enforcement of Hudood) Ordinance, 1979 (VII of 1979),
s. 19 (w.e.f the 10
th
day of February, 1979).
498. [Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a married woman.] Rep. by the
Offences of Zina (Enforcement of Hudood) Ordinance, 1979 (VII of 1979), s. 19 (w.e.f the10th day of February,
1979).
1
CHAPTER XXA
OF OFFENCES AGAINST WOMEN