[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 328: Exposure and abandonment of child under twelve years by parent or person having care

of it. Whoever being the father or mother of a child under the age of twelve years, or having the care of such
child, shall expose or leave such child in any place with the intention of wholly abandoning such child, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or
with both.
Explanation.
__
This section is not intended to prevent the trial of the offender for qatl-i-amd or qatl-i-shibh-i-amd or
qatl-bis-sabab, as the case may be, if the child dies in consequence of the exposure.
3
[328A. Cruelty to a child.— Whoever willfully assaults, ill-treats, neglects, abandons or does an act of
omission  or commission,  that results  in  or  has,  potential  to harm or injure the child by  causing  physical  or
psychological injury to him shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not
be  less than one year and may  extend up  to three years,  or with fine which shall not be  less than  twenty-five
thousand rupees and may extend up to fifty thousand rupees, or with both.]
1
Ins. by Act, I of 2005, s. 10.
2
For such Notification, Please see folder of S.R.O’s u/s 323 of Act XVV of 1860.
3
Ins. by Act X of 2016, s. 5.
4
Omitted by Federal Act No. XXXVII of 2022, S. 2 Dated 28/12/2022.
329. Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body. Whoever, by secretly burying or
otherwise disposing of the dead body of a child whether such child dies before or after or during its
birth, intentionally conceals or endeavours to conceal the birth shall be punishable with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
330. Disbursement of diyat. The diyat shall be disbursed among the heirs of the victim
according to their respective shares in inheritance:
Provided that, where an heir foregoes his share, the diyat shall not be recovered to the extent of his
share.
331. Payment of diyat. (1) The diyat may be made payable in lumpsum or in instalments spread
over a period of
1
[five years] from the date of the final judgement.
(2) Where a convict fails to pay diyat or any part thereof within the period specified in sub- section
(1),  the  convict  may  be  kept in  jail and  dealt with in the same  manner as if  sentenced to simple
imprisonment until the diyat is paid full or may be released on bail if he furnishes security
1
[or surety]
equivalent to the amount of diyat to the satisfaction of the court
1
[or may be released on parole as may
be prescribed
1
[by] the rule].
(3) Where a convict dies before the payment of diyat or any part thereof, it shall be recovered from
his estate.
332. Hurt. (1) Whoever causes pain, harm, disease, infirmity or injury to any person or impairs,
disables
2
[disfigures, defaces] or dismembers any organ of the body or part thereof of any person without
causing his death, is said to cause hurt.
(2) The following are the kinds of hurt:
(a) Itlaf­i­udw;
(b) itlaf­i­salahiyyat­i­udw;
(c) shajjah;
(d) jurh ;and;
(e) all kinds of other hurts.
2
[Explanation. Disfigure means disfigurement of face or disfigurement or dismemberment of
any organ or any part of the organ of the human body which impairs or injuries or conodes or deforms
the symmetry or appearance of a person.]
333. Itlaf-i-udw. Whoever dismembers, amputates, severs any limb or organ of the body of
another person is said to cause Itlaf-i-udw.
1
Subs. Ins. & added by Act. XV of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 3-10-2007).
2
Ins & added by Act XXV of 2011, s.2.
334. Punishment for itlaf-i-udw. Whoever by doing any act with the intention of thereby causing hurt to
any person, or with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any person causes itlaf-i-udw of any
person, shall, in consultation with the authorised medical officer, be punished with qisas, and if the qisas is not
executable keeping in view the principles of equality in accordance with the Injunctions of Islam, the offender
shall be liable to arsh and may also be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years as ta'zir.
335. Itlaf-i-salahiyyat-i-udw. Whoever destroys or permanently impairs the functioning, power or
capacity of an organ of the body of another person, or causes permanent disfigurement is said to cause itlaf-i-
salahiyyat-i-udw.
336. Punishment for itlaf-i-salahiyyat-i-udw. Whoever, by doing any act with the intention of causing
hurt to any person, or with the knowledge that he is likely to cause hurt to any person, causes itlafi-salahiyyat-
i-udw, of any person, shall, in consultation with the authorised medical officer, be punished with qisas and if the
qisas is not executable keeping in view the principles of equality in accordance with the Injunctions of Islam, the
offender shall  be  liable  to arsh and may also  be punished with imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term
which may extend to ten years as ta'zir.
1
[336A. Hurt caused by corrosive substance.
whoever with the intention or knowingly causes or
attempts to cause hurt by means of corrosive substance or any substance which is deleterious to human body
when  it  is  swallowed,  inhaled,  comes  into  contact  or  received  into  human  body  or  otherwise  shall  be  said  to
cause hurt by corrosive substance.
Explanation. In this sub-section, unless the context otherwise requires, “corrosive substance” means a
substance which may destroy, cause hurt, deface or dismember any organ of the human body and includes every
kind of  acid,  poison,  explosive  or  explosive  substance, heating substance, noxious thing, arsenic  or any other
chemical which has a corroding effect and which is deleterious to human body.
336B. Punishment for hurt by corrosive substance. whoever causes hurt by corrosive substance shall
be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment of either description which shall not be less than fourteen
years and a minimum fine of one million rupees.]
337. Shajjah. (1) Whoever causes, on the head or face of any person, any hurt which does not amount to
itlaf-i-udw or itlaf-i-salahiyyati-udw, is said to cause shajjah.
(2) The following are the kinds of shajjah, namely:
(a) Shajjah­i­Khafifah;
(b) Shajjah­i­mudihah;
(c) Shajjah­i­hashimah;
(d) Shajjah­i­munaqqilah;
(e) Shajjah­i­ammah; and
(f) Shajjah-i-damighah.
(3) Whoever causes shajjah,
(i) without exposing bone of the victim, is said to cause shajjah-i-khafifah ;
(ii) by exposing any bone of the victim without causing fracture, is said to cause shajjah-i-mudihah ;
(iii) by fracturing the bone of the victim, without dislocating it, is said to cause shajjah-i-hashimah ;
1
Ins by Act XXV of 2011, s.3
(iv)  by causing fracture of the bone of the victim and thereby bone is dislocated, is said to cause
shajjah-i-munaqqilah ;
(v) by causing fracture of the skull of the victim so that the wound touches the membrane of
the brain, is said to cause shajjah-i-ammah ; and
(vi)  by causing fracture of the skull of the victim and the wound ruptures the  membrance  of
the brain is said to cause shajjah-i-damighah.
337A. Punishment of shajjah. Whoever, by doing any act with the intention of thereby causing
hurt to any person, or with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any person, causes
(i) shajjah-i-khafifah to any person, shall be liable to daman and may also be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years as ta'zir;
(ii)  shajjah-i-mudihah to any person, shall, in consultation with the authorised medical officer,
be punished with qisas, and if the qisas is not executable keeping in view the principles of
equality in accordance with the  Injunctions  of Islam, the  convict  shall  be liable to arsh
which shall be five per cent of the diyat and may also be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to five years as ta'zir;
(iii) shajjah-i-hashimah to any person, shall be liable to arsh which shall be ten per cent of the
diyat and may also be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years as ta 'zir;
(iv) shajjah-i-munaqqilah to any person, shall be liable to arsh which shall be fifteen per cent
of the diyat and may also be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years as ta'zir;
(v) shajjah-i-ammah to any person, shall be liable to arsh which shall be one-third of the diyat
and may also be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years as ta'zir ; and
(vi) shajjah-i-damighah to any person shall be liable to arsh which shall be one-half of diyat
and may also be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to fourteen years as ta 'zir.
337B. Jurh. (1) Whoever causes on any part of the body of a person, other than the head or
face, a hurt which leaves a mark of the wound, whether temporary or permanent, is said to cause  jurh.
(2) Jurh is of two kinds, namely:
(a) Jaifah ; and
(b) Ghayr-jaifah
337C. Jaifah. Whoever causes jurh in which the injury extends to the body cavity of the trunk,
is said to cause jaifah.
337D. Punishment for jaifah. Whoever by doing any act with the intention of causing hurt to a
person,  or  with  the  knowledge  that  he  is  likely  to  cause  hurt  to  such  person,  causes jaifah to  such
person,  shall  be  liable  to arsh which  shall  be  one-third  of  the diyat and  may  also  be  punished  with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years as ta'zir.