[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/wp-content/uploads/2026/01/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT-ORDER1984-Amendment-up-to-date-2025.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

QSO Section 34: Proof of admissions against persons making them, and by or on their behalf

— Admissions  are  relevant  and  may  be  proved  as  against  the  person  who  makes  them,  or  his
representative in interest; but they cannot be proved by or on behalf of the person who makes them
or by his representative in interest, except in the following cases: —
(1) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when it is of such a
nature  that,  if  the  person  making  it  were  dead,  it  would  be  relevant  as  between  third  persons  under
Article 46.
(2) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when it consist of a
statement of the existence of any state of mind or body, relevant or in issue, made at or about the time
when  such  state  of  mind  or  body  existed,  and  is  accompanied  by conduct  rendering  its  falsehood
improbable.
3
(3) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, if it is relevant otherwise
than as an admission.
Illustrations
(a) The question between A and B is, whether a certain deed is or is not forged.
A affirms that it is genuine, B that it is forged.
A may prove a statement by B that the deed is genuine, and B may prove a statement
by A that the deed is forged; but A cannot prove a statement by himself that the deed
is genuine, nor can B prove a statement by himself that the deed is forged.
(b) A, the captain of a ship, is tried for casting her away.
Evidence is given to show that the ship was taken out of her proper course.
A  produces  a  book  kept  by  him  in  the  ordinary  course  of  his  business  showing
observations alleged to have been taken by him from day to day, and indicating that
the ship was not taken out of her proper course. A may prove these statements, because
they  would  be  admissible  between  third  parties,  if  he  were  dead,  under  Article  46
paragraph (2).
Page 26 of
59
(c) A is accused of a crime committed by him at Peshawar.
He produces a letter written by himself and dated at Lahore on that day, and bearing
the Lahore post-marks of that day.
The statement in the date of the letter is admissible, because, if A were dead, it would
be admissible under Article 46 paragraph (2).
(d) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen.
He offers to prove that he refused to sell them below their value.
A  may  prove  these  statements,  though  they  are  admissions,  because  they  are
explanatory of conduct influenced by facts in issue.
(e) A is accused of fraudulently having in his possession counterfeit coin which he knew
to be counterfeit.
He offers to prove that he asked a skillful person to examine the coin as he doubted
whether it was counterfeit or not, and that that person did examine it and told him it
was genuine.
A may prove these facts for the reasons stated in the last preceding illustration.
35. When  oral  admissions  as  to  contents  of  documents  are relevant. — Oral
admissions  as to the contents of a  document are not relevant, unless  and until the  party proposing to
prove them shows that he is entitled to give secondary evidence of the contents of such document under
the rules hereinafter contained, or unless the genuineness of a document produced is in question.
36. Admissions in civil cases when relevant. — In civil cases no admission is relevant,
if it is made either upon an express condition that evidence of it is not to be given, or under circumstances
from which the Court can infer that the parties agreed together that evidence of it should not be given.
Explanation. — Nothing in this  Article shall be taken to exempt any advocate from giving
evidence of any matter of which he may be compelled to give evidence under Article 9.