[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 166: Public  servant  disobeying  law,  with  intent  to  cause  injury  to  any

person.
[(1)]
3
Whoever, being
a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the law as to the way in which he  is to conduct himself  as
such public servant, intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will, by such disobedience, cause injury
to any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine,
or with both.
3
["(2)  Whoever  being  a  public  sevant  entrusted  with  the  investigation  of  a  case  fails  to  carry  out  the
investigation proerly or diligently or fails to pursue the case in any court of law properly and in breach of his
duties shal be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine or with both.].
Illustration
A, being an officer directed by law to take property in execution, in order to satisfy a decree pronounced in
Z’s favour by a Court of Justice, knowingly disobeys that direction of law, with the knowledge that he is likely
thereby to cause injury to Z. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
167. Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to cause injury. Whoever, being
a public servant, and being, as such public servant, charged with the preparation or translation of any document,
frames or translates that document in a manner which he knows or believes to be incorrect, intending thereby to
cause  or knowing it  to  be  likely that he may thereby  cause injury to any person,  shall  be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
1
S.165A was ins. by the Criminal Law Amdt. Act, 1953 (37 of 1953), s. 2.
2
S.165B was ins. by the Pakistan Penal Code (Amdt.) Ordinance, 1962 (59 of 1962), s. 2.
3
Renumber and added by Act XLIV of 2016, s. 3.
168. Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade. Whoever, being a public servant, and being
legally bound  as  such public servant  not  to engage in trade,  engages in trade,  shall  be  punished with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
169. Public  servant  unlawfully  buying  or  bidding  for  property. Whoever,  being  a public
servant,  and  being legally bound  as  such public servant,  not  to  purchase  or bid for  certain  property,
purchases or bids for that property, either in his own name or in the name of another, or jointly, or in
shares with others, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both ; and the property, if purchased, shall be confiscated.
170. Personating  a  public  servant. Whoever  pretends  to  hold  any  particular  office  as  a public
servant, knowing that he does not hold such office or falsely personates any other person holding such
office, and in such assumed character does or attempts to do any act under colour of such office, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description, for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.