[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 106: Right of private defence against deadly assault when there is risk of harm to innocent

person. If in the exercise of the right of private defence against an assault which reasonably causes the
apprehension of death, the defender be so situated that he cannot effectually exercise that right without
risk of harm to an innocent person, his right of private defence extends to the running of that risk.
Illustration
A  is  attached  by  a  mob  who  attempt  to  murder  him.  He  cannot  effectually  exercise  his  right  of
private defence without firing on the mob, and he cannot fire without risk of harming young children
who are mingled with the mob. A commits no offence if by so firing he harms any of the children.
CHAPTER V
OF ABETMENT
107. Abetment of a thing. A person abets the doing of a thing, who—
First.— Instigates any person to do that thing ; or,
Secondly. Engages with one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of
that thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to the
doing of that thing ; or
Thirdly. Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing.
Explanation 1. A person who, by willful misrepresentation, or by willful concealment of a
material  fact  which  he  is  bound  to  disclose,  voluntarily  causes  or  procures,  or  attempts  to  cause  or
procure, a thing to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that thing.
Illustration
A, a public officer, is authorized by a warrant from a Court of Justice to apprehend Z. B, knowing
that fact and also that C is not Z, willfully represents to A that C is Z, and thereby intentionally causes
A to apprehend C. Here B abets by instigation the apprehension of C.
Explanation 2. Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the commission of an act, does
anything in order to facilitate the commission of that act, and thereby facilitates the commission thereof
is said to aid the doing of that act.
108. Abettor. A  person abets an offence, who  abets either the commission of an offence,  or the
commission of  an  act  which would be  an  offence, if committed  by  a  person  capable  by  law  of
committing an offence with the same intention or knowledge as that of the abettor.
Explanation 1. The abetment of the illegal omission of an act may amount to an offence
although the abettor may not himself be bound to do that act.
Explanation 2. To constitute the offence of abetment it is not necessary that the act abetted
should be committed, or that the effect requisite to constitute the offence should be caused.
Illustrations
(a) A instigates B to murder C, B refuses to do so. A is guilty of abetting B to commit murder.
(b) A instigates B to murder D. B in pursuance of the instigation stabs D. D recovers from the
wound. A is guilty of instigating B to commit murder.
Explanation  3. It is not necessary that the person abetted should be capable by law of
committing  an  offence,  or  that  he  should  have  the  same  guilty  intention  or  knowledge  as  that  of  the
abettor or any guilty intention or knowledge.
Illustrations
(a) A, with a guilty intention,  abets  a child or  a  lunatic  to commit an  act  which would be  an
offence, if committed by a person capable by law of committing an offence, and having the
same intention as A. Here A, whether the act be committed or not, is guilty of abetting an
offence.
(b) A, with the intention of murdering Z, instigates B, a child under seven years of age, to do
an  act  which  causes Z’s death.  B, in consequence  of  the  abetment,  does  the  act in the
absence  of  A  and  thereby,  causes Z’s death.  Here,  though  B  was  not  capable  by  law  of
committing an  offence,  A is  liable to  be  punished in the same manner  as if B  had  been
capable by law of committing an offence, and had committed murder, and he is therefore
subject to the punishment of death.
(c) A instigates B to set fire to a dwelling-house. B, in consequence of the unsoundness of his
mind, being incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is wrong
or contrary to law, sets fire to the house in consequence of A’s instigation. B has committed
no offence, but A is guilty of abetting the offence of setting fire to dwelling- house, and is
liable to the punishment provided for that offence.
(d) A intending to cause a theft to be committed, instigates B to take property belonging to Z
out of Z’s possession. A induces B to believe that the property belongs to A. B takes the
property out of Z’s possession, in good faith, believing it to be A’s property. B, acting under
this misconception, does not take dishonestly, and therefore does not commit theft. But A
is guilty of abetting theft, and is liab1e to the same punishment as if B had commit- ted theft.
Explanation 4.
is also an offence.
The abetment of an offence being an offence, the abetment of such an abetment
Illustration
A instigates B to instigate C to murder Z. B accordingly instigates C to murder Z, and C commits
that offence in consequence of B’s instigation. B is liable to be punished for his offence with the
punishment for murder ; and, as A instigated B to commit the  offence,  A  is  also  liable  to  the  same
punishment.
Explanation 5. It is not necessary to the commission of the offence of abetment by conspiracy
that the abettor should concert the offence with the person who commits it. It is sufficient if he engages
in the conspiracy in pursuance of which the offence is committed.
Illustration
A concerts with B a plan for poisoning Z. It is agreed that A shall administer the poison. B then
explains the plan to C mentioning that a third person is to administer the poison, but without mentioning
A’s name. C agrees to procure the poison, and procures and delivers it to B for the purpose of its being
used in the manner explained. A administers the poison ; Z dies in consequence. Here, though A and C
have not conspired together, yet C has been engaged in the conspiracy in pursuance of which Z has
been murdered.  C  has  therefore  committed  the  offence  defined in this  section  and is  liable to  the
punishment for murder.
.
1
[108.A.  Abetment  in  Pakistan  of  offences  outside  it. A  person  abets  an  offence  within  the
meaning  of  this  Code  who,  in
2
[Pakistan],  abets  the  commission  of  any  act  without  and  beyond
2
[Pakistan] which would constitute an offence committed in
2
[Pakistan].
Illustration
A,  in
2
[Pakistan],  instigates  B,  a  foreigner  in  Goa,  to  commit  a  murder  in  Goa.  A  is  guilty  of
abetting murder.]