[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CPC Section 9: When party may be put in immediate possession of land the

subject-matter of suit.– Where land paying revenue to Government, or a
tenure liable to sale, is the subject-matter of a suit, if the party in possession of
such land or tenure neglects to pay the Government revenue, or the rent due to
the proprietor of the tenure, as the case may be, and such land or tenure is
consequently ordered to be sold, any other party to the suit claiming to have an
interest in such land or tenure may, upon payment of the revenue or rent due
previously to the sale (and with or without security at the discretion of the Court)
be put in immediate possession of the land or tenure; and the Court in its
decree may award against the defaulter the amount so paid, with interest
thereon at such rate as the Court thinks fit, or may charge the amount so paid,
with interest thereon at such rate as the Court orders, in any adjustment of
accounts which may be directed in the decree passed in the suit.
10. Deposit of money, etc., in Court.– Where the subject-matter of a suit is
money or some other thing capable of delivery, and any party thereto admits that
he holds such money or other thing as a trustee for another party, or that it
belongs or is due to another party, the Court may order the same to be deposited
in Court or delivered to such last-named party, with or without security, subject
to the further direction of the Court.
ORDER XL
APPOINTMENT OF RECEIVERS
1. Appointment of recievers.– (1) Where it appears to the Court to be just
and convenient, the Court may by order
__
a) appoint a receiver of any property, whether before or after
decree;
b) remove any person from the possession or custody of the
property;
c) commit the same to the possession, custody or management of
the receiver; and
d) confer upon the receiver all such powers, as to bringing and
defending suits and for the realization, management,
protection, preservation and improvement of the property,
the collection of the rents and profits thereof, the application
and disposal of such rents and profits, and the execution of
documents as the owner himself has, or such of those powers
as the Court thinks fit.
(2) Nothing in this rule shall authorise the Court to remove from the
possession or custody of property any person whom any party to the suit has not
present right so to remove.
2. Remuneration.– The Court may by general or special order fix the
amount to be paid as remuneration for the service of the receiver.
3. Duties.– Every receiver so appointed shall–
a) furnish such security (if any) as the Court thinks fit, duly to
account for what he shall receive in respect of the property;
b) submit his accounts at such periods and in such form as the Court
directs:
c) pay the amount due from him as the Court directs; and
d) be responsible for any loss occasioned to the property by his
wilful default or gross negligence.
4. Enforcement of reciver`s duties.– Where a receiver-
a) fails to submit his accounts at such periods and in such form as the
Court directs, or
b) fails to pay the amount due from him as the Court directs, or
c) occasions loss to the property by his wilful default or gross negligence,
the Court may direct his property to be attached and may sell such
property, and may apply the proceeds to make good any amount
found to be due from him or any loss occasioned by him, and shall
pay the balance (if any) to the receiver.
5. When Collector may be appointed reciever.– Where the property is
land paying revenue to the Government, or land of which the revenue has been
assigned or redeemed and the Court considers that the interests of those
concerned will be promoted by the management of the Collector, the Court may,
with the consent of the Collector, appoint him to be receiver of such property.
ORDER XLI
APPEALS FROM ORIGINAL DECREES
1. Form of appeal. What to accompany memorandum.– (1) Every
appeal shall be preferred in the form of a memorandum signed by the appellant or
his pleader and presented to the Court or to such officer as it appoints in this
behalf. The memorandum shall be accompanied by a copy of the decree
appealed from and (unless the Appellate Court dispenses therewith) of the
judgment on which it is founded.
(2) Contents of memorandum. The memorandum shall set forth,
concisely and under distinct heads, the grounds of objection to the decree
appealed from without any argument or narrative; and such grounds shall be
numbered consecutively.
2. Grounds which may be taken in appeal.– The appellant shall not,
except by leave of the Court, urge or be heard in support of any ground of
objection not set forth in the memorandum of appeal; but the Appellate Court, in
deciding the appeal, shall not be confined to the grounds of objection set forth in
the memorandum of appeal or taken by leave of the Court under this rule:
Provided that the Court shall not rest its decision on any other ground
unless the party who may be affected thereby has had a sufficient opportunity of
contesting the case on that ground.
3. Rejection or amendment of memorandum.– (1) Where the
memorandum of appeal is not drawn up in the manner hereinbefore prescribed, it
may be rejected, or be returned to the appellant for the purpose of being amended
within a time to be fixed by the Court or be amended then and there.
(2) Where the Court rejects any memorandum, it shall record the reasons
for such rejection.
(3) Where a memorandum of appeal is amended, the Judge, or such
officer as he appoints in this behalf, shall sign or initial the amendment.