[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://khalidzafar.com/wp-content/files_mf/1527158791QanuneShahadatOrder1984.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-14

QSO Section 14: Production of documents which another person, having possession, could refuse to produce

No one shall be compelled to produce documents in his possession, which any other person
would be entitled to refuse to produce if they were in his possession, unless such last-
mentioned person consents to their production.
15. Witness not excused from answering on ground that answer will criminate. A witness shall
not be excused from answering any question as to any matter relevant to the matter in issue in
any suit or in any civil or criminal proceedings, upon the ground that the answer to such
question will criminate, or may tend directly or indirectly to criminate, such witness, or that it
will expose, or tend directly or indirectly to expose, such witness to a penalty or forfeiture of
any kind:
Provided that no such answer, which a witness shall be compelled to give, shall subject him to
any arrest or prosecution, or be proved against him in any criminal proceedings, except a
prosecution for giving false evidence by such answer.
COMMENTARY
Statement of witness in Court in judicial proceedings whether privileged. Qualified protection.
Witness enjoys absolute privilege as the ultimate object of dispensing justice may rest on his
testimony which in all probability must convey truth relating to the inquiry. Placing any fetters
on witness may detain him from deposing truth or at least all that he knows about the point in
issue and the same might misdirect the course of justice. Even alternate case of giving qualified
privilege to witnesses‘ statement had to be confined to his deposition, which being available in
its entirety on the record was scrutinized at length by the Court in revision for neither of the
Courts below had expressed opinion as to whether the statement in question, could not be
afforded qualified protection. Remarks of witness, during judicial proceeding did not appear to
have been wanton, reckless or beyond the plea of inquiry.2
Defamatory remarks made by a witness in his testimony in judicial proceeding against counsel
in answer to a question in cross-examination. Privilege. Extent of. Plaint, in suit for damages
against such witness showed that no motive or ulterior reason was attributed therein to witness
in having made such typical remarks against the counsel. Element of malice was thus missing in
the plaint; instead plea taken was that those remarks were made deliberately which expression
was not synonymous with the motive besmearing thinking of witness against the counsel.
Remarks attributed to witness related to a case wherein, the property in question, as ―Tarka‖ of
the propositus on whose demise partition thereof, was being sought. Witness in answer to a
question, had explained lamenting how the counsel earlier persuaded him to make a typical
statement before Court on the pretext that it was conducive to the interest of the minor
orphans: witness thought in his own way that the statement obtained from him by the counsel
was detrimental to the interest of minor orphans; and in that context he had dubbed counsel to
be cruel. Witness had reiterated in the later part of his statement that his testimony before the
Court presumably against the interest of orphans, was the result of deceitful and
unconscionable promptings of counsel. Witness, while making such remarks against counsel
was feeling qualms of conscience in recalling that he was obliged to make involuntarily a
statement against the interest of orphans because of counsel‘s careless and unconscionable
attitude. Such remarks having been obtained in cross-examination were not voluntary and
were, thus, privileged. Defamatory remarks made voluntarily were, however, not privileged.
Remarks attributed to witness were not unconnected or irrelevant to the matter in issue;
remarks in question were evoked when witness was apparently confronted with his previous
statement and were deeply relatable to the subject-matter of suit; purport where of was, to
express how a false suggestion was made to witness pertaining to the interest of orphans in the
property. Remarks attributed to witness were germane to the matter in inquiry and were fully
protected.3
Defamatory remarks made by a witness in his testimony in judicial proceeding whether
privileged. Witness was bound to say all that he knew even though defamatory. Such latitude to
witness was indispensable for searching truth to render justice. Where statement of a witness
dealt with a matter which was not in any reasonable sense germane to the subject-matter in
issue, the protection of privilege should not be extended to that statement. Test applicable to
the statement of a witness was that he was not showing malice; was not trying to degenerate
the privilege into a licence; was stating something quite connected with and relevant to the
issue in question; and was not dealing with a matter not germane to the point in issue; where
there were indications that witness was actuated by any of such considerations, his statement
would not be protected.4
16. Accomplice. An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person, except
in the case of an offence punishable with hadd; and a conviction is not illegal merely because it
proceeds upon the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice.
COMMENTARY
Evidence of accomplice, admissibility of. Evidence of an accomplice against co-accused is
inadmissible only in cases of  ̳Hadd‘ and  ̳Qisas‘, and though admissible in cases relating to
offences liable to  ̳Tazir‘ only but conviction in such cases cannot be based solely on the
uncorroborated testimony of such accomplice.5
Provision relating to conviction on sole testimony of accomplice as provided in Art. 16 declared,
for reasons stated in judgment, to be repugnant to Injunctions of Islam w.e.f. 31st December,
1991 whereafter Art. 3 would become void and shall be of no effect.6
Uncorroborated evidence of an accomplice can be made basis of conviction in all criminal cases
except those punishable with Hadd. Courts, however, as a rule of prudence seeking
corroboration in material particulars of evidence of an accomplice before making it basis of
conviction.7
17. Competence and number of witnesses. — (1) The competence of a person to testify, and
the number of witnesses required in any case shall be determined in accordance with the
Injunctions of Islam as laid down in the Holy Quran and Sunnah.
(2) Unless otherwise provided in any law relating to the enforcement of Hudood or any other
special law,—
(a) in matters pertaining to financial or future obligations, if reduced to writing, the instrument
shall be attested by two men, or one man and two women, so that one may remind the other,
if necessary, and evidence shall be led accordingly; and
(b) in all other matters, the Court may accept or act on, the testimony of one man or one
woman or such other evidence as the circumstances of the case may warrant.
COMMENTARY
In criminal cases, where accused is being proceeded against for awarding Tazir punishment,
Tazkiya-al-Shahood is not required. Court can legitimately act on evidence without Tazkiya
which, to satisfaction of Court, establishes guilt of accused beyond reasonable doubt.8
Court can convict an accused person on the testimony of one dependable witness. Law attaches
more importance to quality than to quantity of evidence.
Proof of a fact would depend upon the character of witnesses and their competency to speak to
that fact.9
Clause (1) of Art. 17 of Qanun-e-Shahadat is not exhaustive because it enjoins a Judge or a
Qazi to find out for himself from the Holy Qur‘an and Sunnah the competence and number of
witnesses in a given case.1
Tazkiyah-al-shuhood – Non observance of — Effect: – Contention that the process of tazkiyah-
al-shuhood was not resorted to, therefore, the appellants could not have been punished on the
basis of the statements of the P.Ws, — repelled. It was held, the record does not indicate that
the requirements of tazkiyah-al-shuhood as envisaged by section 7 of the Hudood Ordinance, in
the case were satisfied yet, the fact remains that statements of the witnesses which other-wise
were, recorded on oath, could not have been straight away rejected No doubt, tazkiyah-
alshuhood is a condition precedent to impose the sentence of hadd, yet, it cannot be said that
ta‘zir punishment, cannot be inflicted on an accused, if it has not been undertaken. Since, every
Muslim is a competent witness and he is ordained to speak the truth therefore, his testimony,
so far as ta‘zir punishment is concerned, cannot be discarded, if it is otherwise, believable. In a
number of cases, where the requirements of tazkiya-al-shahood, were not fulfilled testimonies
of the witnesses were believed, by the court, to award ta‘zir punishments.[P-39]D1a
CHAPTER III
OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
18. Evidence may be given of facts in issue and relevant facts. Evidence may be given in any
suit or proceeding of the existence or non-existence of every fact in issue and of such other
facts as are hereinafter declared to be relevant, and of no others.
Explanation. This Article shall not enable any person to give evidence of a fact which he is
disentitled to prove by any provision of the law for the time being in force relating to Civil
Procedure.
Illustrations
(a) A is tried for the murder of B by beating him with a club with the intention of causing his
death.
At A‘s trial the following facts are in issue:—
A‘s beating B with the club;
A‘s causing B‘s death by such beating;
A‘s intention to cause B‘s death.
(b) A suitor does not bring with him and have in readiness for production at the first hearing of
the case, a bond on which he relies. This Article does not enable him to produce the bond or
prove its contents at a subsequent stage of the proceedings, otherwise than in accordance with
the conditions prescribed by the law for the time being in force relating to Civil Procedure.
19. Relevancy of facts forming part of same transaction. Facts which though not in issue, are so
connected with a fact in issue as to form part of the same transaction, are relevant, whether
they occurred at the same time and place or at different times and places.
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of the murder of B by beating him. Whatever was said or done by A or B or the
by-standers at the beating, or, shortly before or after it as to form part of the transaction, is a
relevant fact.
(b) A is accused of waging war against Pakistan by taking part in an armed insurrection in
which property is destroyed, troops are attacked, and goals are broken open. The occurrence of
these facts is relevant, as forming part of the general transaction, though A may not have been
present at all of them.
(c) A sues B for a libel contained in a letter forming part of a correspondence. Letters between
the parties relating to the subject out of which the libel arose, and forming part of the
correspondence in which it is contained, are relevant facts, though they do not contain the libel
itself.
(d) The question is, whether certain goods ordered from B were delivered to A. The goods were
delivered to several intermediate persons successively. Each delivery is a relevant fact.
COMMENTARY
A portion of the statement of a witness based on personal observation and knowledge of the
witness cannot be regarded as hearsay. — because statements made under immediate
influence of a transaction being resiesdae are admissible under Article 19 of the Qanun-e-
Shahadat Order 1984. — Hearsay testimony would be admissible if it is proved that the object
of the maker of the statement was to elucidate and explain the circumstances connected with
the same transaction provided the possibility of concoction or distortion, to the advantage of
the maker or to the disadvantage of the accused, is ruled out.1b
Statement made immediately after murder occurrence under influence of occurrence in order to
characterize it and explain circumstances connected therewith would be admissible under Art.
19 as res gestate evidence.2
Statement made by an independent witness of murder occurrence would be relevant under Art.
19 for determining guilt of accused.3
20. Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect of facts in issue. Facts which are the occasion,
cause or effect, immediate or otherwise, of relevant facts, or facts in issue, or which constitute
the state of things under which they happened, or which afforded an opportunity for their
occurrence or transaction, are relevant.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A robbed B.
The facts that, shortly before the robbery, B went to a fair with money in his possession, and
that he showed it or mentioned the fact that he had it, to third person, are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A murdered B.
Marks on the ground, produced by a struggle at or near the place where the murder was
committed, are relevant facts.
(c) the question is, whether A poisoned B.
The state of B‘s health before the symptoms ascribed to poison, and habits of B. Known to A,
which afforded an opportunity for the administration of poison, are relevant facts.
21. Motive, preparation and previous or subsequent conduct. (1) Any fact is relevant which
shows or constitutes a motive or preparation for any fact in issue or relevant fact.
(2) The conduct of any party, or any agent to any party, to any suit or proceeding, in reference
to such suit or proceeding, or in reference to any fact in issue therein or relevant thereto, and
the conduct of any person an offence against whom is the subject of any proceeding, is
relevant, if such conduct influences or is influenced by any fact in issue or relevant fact, and
whether it was previous or subsequent thereto.
Explanation 1. The word ―conduct‖ in this clause does not include statements, unless those
statements accompany and explain acts other than statements but this explain is not to affect
the relevancy of statements under any other Article of this Order.
Explanation 2. When the conduct of any person is relevant, any statement made to him or in his
presence and hearing, which affects such conduct, is relevant.
Illustrations
(a) A is tried for the murder of B.
The facts that A murdered C, that B knew that A had murdered C, and that B had tried to extort
money from A by threatening to make his knowledge public are relevant.
(b) A sues B upon a bond for the payment of money. B denies the making of the bond.
The fact that, at the time when the bond was alleged to be made, B required only for a
particular purpose, is relevant.
(c) A is tried for the murder of B by poison; the fact that, before the death of B. A procured
position similar to that which was administered to D, is relevant.
(d) The question is whether a certain document is the will of A.
The facts that, not long before the date of the alleged will A made inquiry into matters to which
the provisions of the alleged will relate, that he consulted advocates in reference to making the
will, and that he caused drafts of other wills to be prepared of which he did not approve, are
relevant.
(e) A is accused of a crime.
The facts that, either before or at the time of, or after the alleged crime, A provided evidence
which would tend to give to the facts of the case an appearance favourable to himself, or that
he destroyed or concealed evidence or prevented the presence or procured the absence of
persons who might have been witnesses, or suborned persons to give false evidence respecting
it, are relevant.
(f) The question is whether a robbed B.
The facts that, after B was robbed, C said in A‘s presence;
The Police are coming to look for the man who robbed B, and that immediately afterwards A
ran away, are relevant.‖
(g) The question is whether A owes B Rs. 10,000.
The facts that A asked C to lend him money, and that D said to C in A‘s presence and hearing:
―I advice you not to trust A, for he owes B 10,000 rupees‖, and that A went away without
making any answer, are relevant facts.
(h) The question is, whether A committed a crime.
The fact that A absconded after receiving a letter warning him that inquiry was being made for
the criminal, and the contents of the letter, are relevant.
(i) A is accused of a crime.
The facts that, after the commission of the alleged crime, he absconded, or was in possession
of property or the proceeds of property acquired by the crime, or attempted to conceal things
which were or might have been used in committing it, are relevant.
(j) The question is whether A was ravished.
The facts that, shortly after the alleged rape, she made a complaint relating to the crime, the
circumstances under which, and the terms in which, the compliant was made are relevant.
The fact that, without making a complaint, she said, that she had been ravished is not relevant
as conduct under this Article though it may be relevant as a dying declaration under Article 46m
paragraph (1), or as corroborative evidence under Article 153.
(k) The question is, whether a was robbed.
The fact that, soon after the alleged robbery, he made a complaint relating to the offence, the
circumstances under which, and the terms in which, the complaint was made, are relevant.
The fact that he said he had been robbed without making any complaint, is not relevant, as
conduct under this Article, though it may be relevant as a dying declaration under Article 46,
paragraph (1), or as corroborative evidence under Article 153.
22. Facts necessary to explain or introduce relevant facts. Facts necessary to explain or
introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which support or rebut an inference suggested by a
fact in issue or relevant fact, or which establish the identity of anything or person whose
identity is relevant, or fix the time or place at which any fact in issue or relevant facts
happened, or which show the relation of parties by whom any such fact was transacted, are
relevant insofar as they are necessary for that purpose.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether a given document is the will of A.
The state of A‘s property and of his family at the date of the alleged will may be relevant facts.
(b) A sues B for a libel imputing disgraceful conduct to A; B affairs that the matter alleged to be
libelous is true.
The position and relations of the parties at the time when the libel was published may be
relevant facts as introductory to the facts in issue.
The particulars of a dispute between A and B about a matter unconnected with the alleged libel
are irrelevant, though the fact that there was a dispute may be relevant if it affected the
relations between A and B.
(c) A is accused of a crime.
The fact that, soon after the commission of the crime, A absconded from his house, is relevant
under Article 21, as conduct subsequent to and affected by facts in issue.
The fact that at the time when he left home he had sudden and urgent business at the place to
which he went is relevant, as tending to explain the fact that he left home suddenly.
The details of the business on which he left are not relevant except insofar as they are
necessary to show that the business was sudden and urgent.
(d) A sues B for inducing C to break a contract of service made by him with A, C, on leaving A‘s
service, says to A ―I am leaving you because B has made me a better offer.‖ This statement is a
relevant fact as explanatory of C‘s conduct, which is relevant as a fact in issue.
(e) A, accused of theft, is seen to give the stolen property to B, who is seen to give to A‘s wife.
B, says as he delivers it: ―A says you are to hide this.‖ B‘s statement is relevant as explanatory
of a fact which is part of the transaction.
(f) A is tried for a riot and is proved to have marched at the head of a mob. The cries of mob
are relevant as explanatory of the nature of the transaction.
COMMENTARY
Identification parade. When culprits were not known to the witnesses and witnesses had only a
monetary glimpse of the culprits at the time of occurrence, prosecution was bound to prove
that culprits, soon after their arrest, were put to identification test and got identified by eye-
witnesses through an identification test/parade held in presence of a Magistrate.4
Identification test. Nature. Holding of identification test was not a requirement of law but was
only one of the methods to test veracity of evidence of an eye-witness who had an occasion to
see accused and claimed to identify the culprit.5
Identification test. Nature. Identification test was not a requirement of law, but it was only one
of the methods to test the veracity of evidence of an eye-witness who had an occasion to see
accused and claimed to identify him.6
Identification parade. Delay in holding identification parade was not always fatal to case of
prosecution. Credibility of identification parade depended upon a host of circumstances
including type of witnesses, manner in which same was carried out including proportion of
innocent persons to be mixed with suspects and fact as to how and in what manner and
circumstances prosecution witnesses came to pick out a particular accused and details of part
which that accused had, in fact, taken in crime. Delay simpliciter in conducting identification
parade, would not prejudice capability, if otherwise enough, of eye-witnesses to identify
culprits.8
23. Things said or done by conspirator in reference to common design. — Where there is
reasonable ground to believe that two or more persons have conspired together to commit an
offence or an actionable wrong anything said, done or written by any one of such persons in
reference to their common intention, after the time when such intention was first entertained
by any one of them, is a relevant fact as against each of the persons believed to be so
conspiring, as well for the purpose of proving the existence of the conspiracy as for the purpose
of showing that any such person was a party to it.
Illustrations
Reasonable ground exists for believing that A has joined in a conspiracy to wage war against
Pakistan.
The facts that B procured arms in Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C collected money
in Peshawar for a like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in Karachi. E
published writings advocating the object in view at Multan, and F transmitted from Lahore to G
at Kabul the money which C had collected at Peshawar and contents of a letter written by H
giving an account of the conspiracy are each relevant, both to prove the existence of the
conspiracy, and to prove A‘s complicity in it, although he may have been ignorant of all of them,
and although the persons by whom they were done were strangers to him and although they
may have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it.
24. When facts not otherwise relevant become relevant. Facts not otherwise relevant are
relevant —
(a) if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact;
(2) if by themselves or in connection with other facts they make the existence or non-existence
of any fact in issue or relevant fact highly probable or improbable.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A committed a crime at Peshawar on a certain day.
The fact that, on that day, A was at Lahore is relevant.
The fact that near the time when the crime was committed, A was at a distance from the place
where it was committed, which would render it highly improbable, though not impossible, that
he committed it, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A committed a crime.
The circumstances are such that the crime must have been committed either by A, B, C, or D.
Every fact which shows that the crime could have been committed by no one else and that it
was not committed by either B, C or D, is relevant.
25. In suits for damages facts tending to enable Court to determine amount are relevant. In
suits in which damages are claimed, any fact which will enable the Court to determine the
amount of damages which ought to be awarded, is relevant.
26. Facts relevant when right or custom is in question. Where the question is as to the
existence of any right or custom, the following facts are relevant:—
(a) any transaction by which the right or custom in question was created, claimed, modified,
recognized, asserted or denied, or was inconsistent with its existence;
(b) particular instances in which the right or custom was claimed recognized or exercised, or in
which its exercise was disputed, asserted or departed from.
Illustrations
The question is whether A has a right to a fishery. A deed conferring the fishery on A‘s
ancestors, a mortgage of the fishery by A‘s father, a subsequent grant of the fishery by A‘s
father, irreconcilable with mortgage, particular instances in which A‘s father exercised the right,
or in which the exercise of the right was stopped by A‘s neighbours are relevant facts.
27. Facts showing existence of state of mind, or of body, or bodily feeling. Facts showing in the
existence of any state of mind, such as intention, knowledge, good faith, negligence, rashness,
ill-will or good-will towards any particular person, or showing the existence of any state of body
or bodily feeling, are relevant, when the existence of any such state of mind or body or bodily
feeling is in issue or relevant.
Explanation 1. A fact relevant as showing the existence of a relevant state of mind must show
that the state of mind exists, not generally but in reference to the particulars matter in
question.
Explanation 2. But where, upon the trial of a person accused of an offence, the previous
commission by the accused of an offence is relevant within the meaning of this Article, the
previous conviction of such person shall also be a relevant fact.
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen. It is proved that he was
in possession of a particular stolen article.
The fact that, at the same time, he was in possession of many other stolen articles is relevant,
as tending to show that he knew each and all of the articles of which he was in possession to
be stolen.
(b) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to another person a counterfeit coin which, at the
time when he delivered it, he knew to be counterfeit.
The fact that, at the (sic) its delivery, A was possessed of a number of other pieces of
counterfeit (sic) relevant.
The fact that A had been previously convicted of delivering to another person as genuine a
counterfeit coin knowing it to be counterfeit is relevant.
(c) A sues B for damages done by a dog of B which B knew to be ferocious.
The facts that the dog had previously bitten X, Y and Z and that they had made complaints to
B, are relevant.
(d) The question is whether a, the acceptor of a bill of exchange, knew that the name of the
payee was fictitious.
The fact that A had accepted other bills drawn in the same manner before they could have
been transmitted to him by the payee if the payee had been a real person, is relevant as
showing that A knew tht the payee was a fictitious person.
(e) A is accused of defaming B by publishing an imputation intended to harm the reputation of
B.
The fact of previous publications by A respecting B, showing ill-will on the part of A towards b is
relevant, as proving A‘s intention to harm B‘s reputation by the particular publication in
question.
The facts that there was no previous quarrel between A and b, and A repeated the matter
complained of as he heard it, are relevant, as showing that A did not intended to harm the
reputation of B.
(f) A is sued by B for fraudulently representing to B that C was solvent whereby B, being
inducted to trust C, who was insolvent, suffered loss.
The fact that at the time when A represented C to be solvent, C was supposed to be solvent by
his neighbours and by persons dealing with him, is relevant, as showing that A made the
representation in good faith.
(g) A is sued by B for the price of work done by B, upon a house of which A is owner by the
order of C, a contractor.
A‘s defence is that B‘s contract was with C.
The fact that paid C for the work in question is relevant, as proving that A did, in good faith,
make over to C the management of the work in question, so that C was in a position to contract
with B on C‘s own account, and not as agent for A.
(h) A is accused of the dishonest misappropriation of property which he had found, and the
question is whether, when he appropriated it, he believed in good faith that the real owner not
be found.
The fact that public notice of the loss of the property had been given in the place where A was,
is relevant, as showing that A did not in good faith believe that the real owner of the property
could not be found.
The fact that A knew, or had reason to believe, that the notice was given fraudulently by C,
who had heard of the loss of the property and whished to set up a false claim to it, is relevant,
as showing that the fact that A knew of the notice did not disprove A‘s good faith.
(i) A is charged with shooting at B with intent to kill him. In order to show A‘s intent the fact of
A‘s having previously shot at B may be proved.
(j) A is charged with sending threatening letters to B. Threatening letter previously sent by A to
B may be proved, as showing the intention of the letters.
(k) The question is, whether A has been guilty of cruelty towards B, his wife.
Expressions of their feeling towards each other shortly before or after the alleged cruelty are
relevant facts.
(l) The question is whether A‘s death was caused by poison. Statements made by A during his
illness as to his symptoms are relevant facts.
(m) The question is, what was the state of A‘s health at the time an assurance on his life was
effected.
Statement made by A as to the state of his health at or near the time in question are relevant
facts.
(n) A sues B for negligence in providing him with a carriage for hire not reasonably fit for use,
whereby A was injured.
The fact that B‘s attention was drawn on other occasion to the defect of that particular carriage
is relevant.
The fact that B was habitually negligent about the carriages which he let to hire is irrelevant.
(o) A is tried for the murder of B by intentionally shooting him dead.
The fact A on other occasions shot at B is relevant as showing his intention to shoot B.
The fact that A was in the habit of shooting at people with intent to murder them is irrelevant.
(p) A is tried for a crime.
The fact that he said something indicating an intention to commit that particular crime is
relevant.
The fact that he said something indicated general disposition to commit crimes of that class is
irrelevant.
28. Facts bearing on question whether act was accidental or intentional. When there is a
question whether an act was accidental or intentional, or done with a particular knowledge or
intention, the fact that such act formed part of a series of similar occurrence, in each of which
the person doing the act was concerned, is relevant.
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of burning down his house in order to obtain money for which it is insured.
The facts that A lived in several houses successively each of which he insured, in each of which
a fire occurred, and after each of which fires A received payment from different insurance
officers, are relevant as tending to show that the fires were not accidental.
(b) A is employed to receive money from the debtors of B. It is A‘s duty to make entries in a
book showing the amounts received by him. He makes an entry showing that on a particular
occasion he received less than he really did receive.
The question is whether this false entry was accidental or intentional.
The facts that other entries made by A in the same book are false and that the false entry is in
each case in favour of A, are relevant.
(c) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to B a counterfeit rupees.
The question is, whether the delivery of the rupee was accidental.
The facts that, soon before or soon after the delivery to B, A delivered counterfeit rupees to C,
D and E are relevant as showing that the delivery to B was not accidental.
29. Existence of course of business when relevant. When there is a question whether a
particular act was done, the existence of any course of business, according to which it naturally
would have been done, is a relevant fact.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether a particular letter was dispatched.
The facts that it was the ordinary course of business for all letters put in a certain place to be
carried to the post, and that particular letter was put in that place are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether a particular letter reach A.
The facts that it was posted in due course, and was not returned through the Dead Letter
Office, are relevant.
ADMISSIONS
30. Admission defined. An admission is a statement, oral or documentary, which suggests any
inference as to any fact in issue or relevant fact, and which is made by any of the persons, and
under the circumstances, hereinafter mentioned.
COMMENTARY
Admission of fact by plaintiffs. Effect. Plaintiff in his statement before Court had admitted part
of defendant claim viz. value of tube well. Such payment would be made by plaintiffs in addition
to payment of decretal amount.7
Judgment on admission. Essentials. Party to suit can seek decree on admission made in
pleadings or otherwise without waiting for determination of any other question between parties.
Admission sought to be the basis of decree was in fact qualified admission of an official of the
defendant and inter-departmental communications which would not amount to conceding
plaintiff‘s claim. Any admission as contemplated by O.XII, R. 6, C.P.C. has to be unequivocal
admission which could amount to estoppel against the party making such admission. Defendant
had yet to file written statement while application in terms of O.XII. R. 6, C.P.C. had been filed
before defendants had submitted their written statement. Plaintiffs were thus, not entitled to
decree on basis of qualified admission in terms of O.XII, R. 6, C.P.C.8
31. Admission by party to proceeding or his agent, etc. (1) Statement made by a party to the
proceedings, or by an agent to any such party, whom the Court regards, under the
circumstances of the case, as expressly or impliedly authorized by him to make them, are
admissions.
(2) Statements made by parties to suits suing or sued in a representative character, are not
admissions, unless they were made while the party making them held that character.
(3) Statements made by—
(a) persons who have any proprietary or pecuniary interest in the subject-matter of the
proceeding, and who make the statement in their character of persons so interested, or
(b) persons from whom the parties to the suit have derived their interest in the subject-matter
of the suit,
are admissions if they are made during the continuance of the interest of the persons making
the statements.
COMMENTARY
Admission of fact by illiterate lady. Effect. Where illiterate lady who did not understand the
meaning of legal words, like ―decree‖ had admitted in her statement factum of decree against
here and in the same statement denied the existence of any such decree, decree in question,
was not proved in absence of production of copy of decree/judgment in question.1
32. Admission by persons whose position must be proved as against party to suit. Statements
made by persons, whose position or liability it is necessary to prove as against any party to the
suit, are admissions, if such statement would be relevant as against such persons in relation to
such position or liability in a suit brought by or against them, and if they are made whilst the
person making them occupies such position or is subject to such liability.
Illustrations
A undertakes to collect rents for B.
B sues A for not collecting rent due from C to B.
A denies that rent was due from C to B.
A statement by C that he owed B rent is an admission, and is a relevant fact as against A, if A
denies that C did owe rent to B.
33. Admission by persons expressly referred to by party to suit. Statements made by persons to
whom a party to the suit has expressly referred for information in reference to matter in dispute
are admissions.
Illustrations
The question is, whether a horse sold by A to B is sound.
The says to B: ―Go and ask C: C knows all about it.‖ C‘s statement is an admission.
34. Proof of admissions against persons making them, and by or on their behalf. Admission are
relevant and may be proved as against the person who makes them, or his representative in
interest; but they cannot be proved by or on behalf of the person who makes them or by his
representative-in-interest, except in the following cases:—
(1) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when it is of such a
nature that, if the person making it were dead, it would be relevant as between third persons
under Article 46.
(2) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when it consists of a
statement of the existence of any state of mind or body, relevant or in issue, made at or about
the time when such state of mind or body existed, and is accompanied by conduct rendering its
falsehood improbably.
(3) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, if it is relevant
otherwise than as an admission.
Illustrations
(a) The question between A and B is, whether a certain deed is or is not forged. A affirms that
it is genuine, B that it is forged.
A may prove a statement by B that the deed is genuine, and B may prove a statement by A that
the deed is forged; but A cannot prove a statement by himself that the deed is genuine, nor
can B prove a statement by himself that the deed is forged.
(b) A, the captain of a ship, is tried for casting her away.
Evidence is given to show that the ship was taken out of her proper course.
A produces a book kept by him in the ordinary course of his business showing observations
alleged to have been taken by him from day to day, and indicating that the ship was not taken
out of her proper course. A may prove these statements, because they would be admissible
between third parties, if he were dead, under Article 46, paragraph (2).
(c) A is accused of a crime committed by him at Peshawar.
He produces a letter written by himself and dated at Lahore on that day, and bearing the
Lahore post-marks of that day.
The statement in the date of the letter is admissible, because, if A were dead, it would be
admissible under Article 46, paragraph (2).
(d) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen.
He offers to prove that he refused to sell them below their value.
A may prove these statements though they are admissions, because they are explanatory of
conduct influenced by facts in issue.
(e) A is accused of fraudulently having in his possession counterfeit coin which he knew to be
counterfeit.
He offers to prove that he asked a skilful person to examine the coin as he doubted whether it
was counterfeit or not, and that person did examine it and told him it was genuine.
A may prove these facts for the reasons stated in the last preceding illustration.
35. When oral admissions as to contents of documents are relevant. Oral admissions as to the
contents of a document are not relevant, unless and until the party proposing to prove them
shows that he is entitled to give secondary evidence of the contents of such documents under
the rules hereinafter contained, or unless the genuineness of a document produced is in
question.
36. Admissions in civil cases when relevant. In civil cases no admission is relevant, if it is made
either upon an express condition that evidence of it is not to be given, or under circumstances
from which the Court can infer that the parties agreed together that evidence of it should not
be given.
Explanation. Nothing in this Article shall be taken to exempt any advocate from giving evidence
of any matter of which he may be compelled to give evidence under Article 9.