[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 181: False  statement  on  oath  or  affirmation  to  public  servant  or  person  authorised  to

administer an oath or affirmation. Whoever, being legally bound by an oath
4
[or affirmation] to state the
truth  on any subject  to any public  servant  or other person authorized by  law  to administer such  oath
4
[or
affirmation], makes,  to  such  public  servant  or other person  as  aforesaid, touching  that subject, any statement
which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a terms which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
1
Rep. by Act 17 of 1862.
2
Expiations. by the Indian Criminal Law Amdt. Act, 1894 (3 of 1894), s. 5.
3
Subs. by the Central Laws (Statute Reform) Ordinance, 1960 (21 of 1960), s. 3 and 2
nd
Sch. (w.e.f. 14
th
October, 1955), for “the Provinces and the
Capital of the Federation” which had been subs. by A.O., 1949, Art. 3(2) and 4, for “British India”.
4
Ins. by the Oaths Act, 1873 (10 of 1873), s. 15.
5
Subs. by Ord. 86 of 02, s.2 and sch. 1.
1
[182.  False  information  with  intent  to  cause  public  servant  to  use  his  lawful  power  to  the
injury of another person. Whoever gives to any public servant any information which he knows or believes
to be false, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, such public servant
(a) to do or omit anything which such public servant ought not to do or omit if the true state of facts
respecting which such information is given were known by him, or
(b) to use the lawful power of such public servant to the injury or annoyance of any person,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
3
[extend to
(a) Seven years in case the offence in which false information is gives in punishable with death;
(b) five years in case the offence in which false information is given is punishable with imprisonment
for life; or
(c) one fourth of the longest term of imprisonment or with fine as is provided for the offence in which
false information is given and such offence is not covered under clause (a) or clause (b).]
Illustrations
(a) A informs a Magistrate that Z, a police-officer, subordinate to such Magistrate, has been guilty of
neglect of duty or misconduct, knowing such information to be  false, and knowing it to be likely
that the information will cause the Magistrate to dismiss Z.  A has committed the offence defined in
this section.
(b) A  falsely informs a  public  servant that Z has  contraband salt  in  a  secret  place, knowing such
information to be false, and knowing that it is likely that the consequence of the information will be
a search of Z’s premises. attended with annoyance to Z. A has committed the offence defined in this
section.
(c) A  falsely informs a  policeman that he has been  assaulted and robbed  in the neighborhood of  a
particular village. He does not mention the name of any person as one of his assailants, but knows it
to  be  likely that in  consequence  of this  information the police will make enquiries and institute
searches in the village to the annoyance of the villagers or some of them. A has committed an offence
under this section.]
183. Resistance to the taking of property by the lawful authority of a public servant. Whoever
offers any resistance to the taking of any property by the lawful authority of any public servant, knowing or having
reason to believe that he is such public servant, sha1l be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to
2
[three thousand rupees], or with both.
184. Obstructing  sale  of  property  offered  for  sale  by  authority  of  public  servant. Whoever
intentionally obstructs any sale of property offered for sale by the lawful authority of any public servant, as such,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine
which may extend to
2
[one thousand five hundred rupees], or with both.