[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 171: Wearing  garb  or  carrying  token  used  by  public  servant  with  fraudulent  intent

Whoever,  not belonging to  a  certain  class  of public servants,  wears  any  garb  or  carries  any  token
resembling any  garb  or  token  used  by  that  class  of public servants, with the  intention  that it may  be
believed, or with the knowledge that it is likely to be believed, that he belongs to that class of public
servants, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description, for a term which may extend to
three months, or with fine which may extend to
2
[six hundred rupees], or with both.
1
[CHAPTER IXA
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS
171A. “Candidates” “Electoral right” defined. For the purposes of this Chapter
(a) “candidate” means a person who has been nominated as a candidate at any election and
includes  a  person  who,  when  an  election is  in contemplation,  holds himself out  as  a
prospective candidate thereat ; provided that he is subsequently nominated as a candidate
at such election ;
(b) “electoral right” means the right of a person to stand, or not to stand as, or to withdraw from
being, a candidate or to vote or refrain from voting at an election.
171B. Bribery. (1) Whoever
(i) gives a gratification to any person with the object of inducing him or any other person to
exercise any electoral right or of rewarding any person for having exercised any such right
; or
(ii) accepts either for himself or for any other person any gratification as a reward for exercising
any  such right or  for  inducing  or  attempting  to  induce  any  other  person,  to  exercise  any
such right,
1
Chapter IXA ins. by the Elections Offences and Inquiries Act, 1920 (39 of 1920), s. 2.
2
Subs.by ord.86 of 2002, s.2 and sch.I
commits the offence of bribery:
Provided that a declaration of public policy or a promise of public action shall not be an offence
under this section.
(2) A person who offers, or agrees to give, or offers or attempts to procure, a gratification shall be
deemed to give a gratification.
(3) A person who obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain a gratification shall be deemed
to accept a gratification, and a person who accepts a gratification as a motive for doing what he does
not intend to do, or as a reward for doing what he has not done, Shall be deemed to have accepted the
gratification as a reward.
171C. Undue influence at elections. (1) Whoever voluntarily interferes or attempts to interfere
with the free exercise of any electoral right commits the offence of undue influence at an election.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), whoever
(a) threatens any candidate or voter, or any person in whom a candidate or voter is interested,
with injury of any kind, or
(b) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or voter to believe that he or any person in whom
he is interested will become  or will be  rendered  an  object  of Divine displeasure  or  of
spiritual censure,
shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of the electoral right of such candidate or  voter,
within the meaning of sub-section (1).
(3) A declaration of public policy or a promise of public action, or the mere exercise of a legal right
without  intent  to  interfere with an  electoral right, shall  not  be  deemed  to  be  interference within the
meaning of this section.
171D. Personation at elections. Whoever at an election applies for a voting paper or votes in the
name of any other person, whether living or dead, or in a fictitious name, or who having voted once at
such  election  applies  at  the same election  for  a  voting  paper in his own  name,  and  whoever  abets,
procures  or  attempts  to  procure  the  voting  by  any  person in any  such way, commits the  offence  of
personation at an election.
171E. Punishment for bribery. Whoever commits the offence of bribery shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both:
Provided that bribery by treating shall be punished with fine only.
Explanation. ‘Treating’ means that form of bribery where the gratification consists in food,
drink, entertainment, or provision.
171F.  Punishment  for  undue  influence  or  personation  at  an  election. Whoever commits the
offence of undue influence or personation at an election shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
171G. False statement in connection with an election. Whoever with intent to affect the result
of an election makes or publishes any statement purporting to be a statement of fact which is false and
which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to the personal
character or conduct of any candidate shall be punished with fine.
171H. Illegal payments in connection with an election. Whoever without the general or special
authority in writing of a candidate incurs or authorises expenses on account of the holding of any public
meeting, or  upon  any  advertisement,  circular  or  publication,  or in any  other  way  whatsoever  for  the
purpose of promoting or procuring the election of such candidate, shall be punished with fine which
may extend
1
[one thousand five hundred rupees]:
Provided that if any person having incurred any such expenses not exceeding the amount of ten
rupees without authority obtains within ten days from the date on which such expenses were incurred
the approval in writing of the candidate he shall be deemed to have incurred such expenses with the
authority of the candidate.
171I. Failure to keep election accounts. Whoever being required by any law for the time being
in force or any rule having the force of law to keep accounts of expenses incurred at or in connection
with  an  election  fails  to  keep  such  accounts  shall  be  punished  with  fine  which  may  extend  to  five
hundred rupees.]
[171J. 2Inducing any person not to participate in any election or referendum, etc.
Whoever  by  words,  either  spoken  or  written,  or  by visible representation,  induces or, directly  or
indirectly, persuades  or instigates, any  person  not  to  participate in, or  to  boycott,  any  election  or
referendum, or not to exercise his right of vote thereat, shall be punishable with imprisonment of either
description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  three  years,  or with fine  which  may  extend  to  five  lac
rupees, or with both.]
CHAPTER X
OF CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERVANTS.
172. Absconding to avoid service of summons or other proceeding. Whoever absconds in order
to  avoid  being  served with a summons, notice  or  order  proceeding  from  any public servant legally
competent, as such public servant, to issue such summons, notice or order, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  one  month,  or with fine  which  may  extend  to
1
[one
thousand rupees], or with both ;
or, if the summons or notice or order is to attend in person or by agent, or to produce a document
in a Court of Justice, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to
1
[three] thousand rupees, or with both.
1
Sub.by ord No.86 of 2002, s.2 & sch.I.
2
Added by ord. LIV of 1984, s.2