[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://khalidzafar.com/wp-content/files_mf/1527158791QanuneShahadatOrder1984.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-14

QSO Section 55: Judgments, order or decrees other than those mentioned in Article 55 are relevant if they

relate to matters of a public nature relevant to the enquiry; but such judgments, orders or
decrees are not conclusive proof of that which they state.
Illustrations
A sues B for trespass on his land, B alleges the existence of a public right of way over the land,
which A denies.
The existence of a decree in favour of the defendant, in a suit by A against C for a trespass on
the same land, in which C alleged the existence of the same right of way, is relevant, but it is
not conclusive proof that the right of way exists.
57. Judgments, etc. other than those mentioned in Articles 54 to 56, when relevant. Judgments
orders or decrees, other than those mentioned in Articles 54, 55 and 56, are irrelevant, unless
the existence of such judgment, order or decree is a fact in issue, or is relevant under some
other provision of this Order.
Illustrations
(a) A and B separately sue C for a libel which reflects upon each of them, C in each case says
that the matter alleged to be libelous is true, and the circumstances are such that it is probably
true in each case, or in neither.
A obtains a decree against C for damages on the ground that C failed to made out his
justification. The fact is irrelevant as between B and C.
(b) A prosecutes B for adultery with C, A‘s wife.
B denies that C is A‘s wife but the Court convicts B of adultery.
Afterwards, C is prosecuted for bigamy in marrying B during A‘s lifetime C says that she never
was A‘s wife.
The judgment against B is irrelevant as against C.
(c) A prosecutes B for stealing a cow from him, B is convicted. A afterwards sues C for the cow,
which B had sold to him before his conviction. As between A and C, the judgment against B is
irrelevant.
(d) A has obtained a decree for the possession of land against B. C, B‘s son, murders A in
consequence.
The existence of the judgment is relevant, as showing motive for a crime.
(e) A is charged with theft and with having been previously convicted of theft. The previous
conviction is relevant as a fact in issue.
(f) A is tried for the murder of B. The fact that B prosecuted A for libel and that A was convicted
and sentenced is relevant and under Article 21 as showing the motive for the fact in issue.
58. Fraud or collusion in obtaining judgment, or incompetency of Court, may be proved. Any
party to a suit or other proceeding may show that any judgment, order or decree which is
relevant under Article 54, 55 or 56, and which has been proved by the adverse party, was
delivered by a Court not competent to deliver it, or was obtained by fraud or collusion.
OPINION OF THIRD PERSONS WHEN RELEVANT
59. Opinions of experts. When the Court has to form an opinion upon a point of foreign law, of
science, or art, or as to identity of hand-writing or finger impressions, the opinion upon that
point of persons specially skilled in such foreign law, science or art or in questions as to identity
of hand-writing or finger impressions are relevant facts.
Such persons are called experts.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether the death of A was caused by poison. The opinion of experts as to
the symptoms produced by the poison by which A is supposed to have died, are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A at the time of doing a certain act, was by reason of unsoundness
of mind, incapable of knowing he nature of the act, or that he was doing what was either
wrong or contrary to law.
The opinions of experts upon the question whether the symptoms exhibited by commonly show
unsoundness of mind, and whether such unsoundness of mind usually renders persons
incapable of knowing the nature of the acts which they do, or of knowing that what they do is
either wrong or contrary to law, are relevant.
(c) The question is, whether ascertain document was written by A. Another document is
produced which is proved or admitted to have been written by A.
The opinions of experts on the question whether the two documents were written by the same
person or by different persons, are relevant.
COMMENTARY
Opinion of finger-point expert taken on file without objection. Objection to mode of proof at
revisional stage. Competency. Opinion of finger-point expert was taken on file by trial Court
without any objection having been raised about its made of proof. Neither in lower Appellate
Court nor in grounds of revision objection about improper admission of opinion of finger-print
expert in evidence was taken. Defendant in default of clear objection at appropriate time was
precluded from objecting to mode of proof regarding admission of opinion of expert or his
examination on commission in revision.5
Expert opinion. Objection to mode of proof. In default of clear objection taken at the
appropriate time, defendant was precluded from objecting to the mode of proof regarding
admission of the opinion of expert or his examination on commission. Such evidence was rightly
read in evidence in Courts below.6
Criminal trial. Whether the opinion of a person who had investigated the case does or does not
fall within the ambit of Arts. 59 to 65 of Qanun-e-Shahadat and whether such an opinion could
or could not be brought on record as legal evidence. Statement of an Investigating Officer that
according to his investigation a particular person was innocent or guilty, as the case may be, is
an expression of opinion which expression or statement is irrelevant and inadmissible in
evidence.7
Opinion of a witness. Evidentiary value. Exception.8
Belated and unilateral examination of disputed signatures with those obtaining on record by trial
Court, without providing adequate opportunity of hearing to contestants, would not only be
irregular but even illegal, being violative of principles of naturals justice.9
Disputed handwriting or signatures of a person. Proof. Best way of proving disputed
handwriting or signature of a person. Natural variations in the signatures of a person. Factors.1
Handwriting Expert, opinion of. Evidentiary value. Opinion of Handwriting Expert supported by
reasons deserves preference if the opinion is in accord with the direct evidence.2
Appeal to Supreme Court. Suit for specific performance of agreement to sell property. Allegation
of forged signatures of executant on agreement to sell and other contended documents.
Handwriting Expert‘s opinion and concurrent findings of all the three Courts below was that
signatures were not forged. Valuable property being involved in the case and there being wild
allegations of fraud, Supreme Court made an exercise of comparison of the signatures of the
executant with the help of magnifying glass and found the reasonings advanced by the expert
quite plausible and convincing. Concurrent finding of fact of the three lower forums regarding
the genuineness of the agreement to sell also did not suffer from any legal infirmity, misreading
or non-reading of evidence. Supreme Court declined interference in appeal.3
60. Facts bearing upon opinions of experts. Facts, not otherwise relevant, are relevant if they
support or are inconsistent with the opinions of experts, when such opinions are relevant.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A was poisoned by a certain poison. The fact that other persons,
who were poisoned by that poison, exhibited certain symptoms which experts affirm or deny to
be the symptoms of that poison, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether an obstruction to a harbour is caused by a certain sea-wall.
The fact that other harbours similarly situated in other respects, but where there were no such
sea-walls, began to be obstructed at about the same time, is relevant.
61. Opinion as to hand-writing when relevant. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the
person by whom any document was written or signed, the opinion of any person acquainted
with the handwriting of the person by whom it is supposed to be written or signed that it was
or was not written or signed by that person, is a relevant fact.
Explanation. A person is said to be acquainted with the handwriting of another person when he
has seen that person write, or when he has received documents purporting to be written by
that person in answer to documents written by himself or under his authority and addressed to
that person, or when, in the ordinary course of business, documents purporting to be written by
that person have been habitually submitted to him.
Illustration
The question is, whether a given letter is in the hand-writing of A, a merchant in London.
B is merchant in Peshawar, who has written letters addressed to A and received letter
purporting to be written by him. C is B‘s clerk, whose duty it was to examine and file B‘s
correspondence. D is B‘s broker, to whom B habitually submitted the letters purporting to be
written by A for the purpose of advising him thereon.
The opinions of B, C and D on the question whether the letter is in the hand-writing of A are
relevant, though neither B, C or D every saw A write.
COMMENTARY
Traced forgery becomes virtually identical in outward form with the genuine signature and
unless a person is fully conversant with the signature and handwriting of the other, it is not safe
to base conviction upon such opinion alone.4
Handwriting Expert‘s opinion. Opinion of Handwriting Expert is nothing more than a mere
opinion of the person / Handwriting Expert who purports to have issued the same and such
opinion is not evidence until the person who has given it is brought before the Court and is
subjected to the test of cross-examination.5
62. Opinion as to existence of right or custom, when relevant. When the Court has to form an
opinion as to the existence of any general custom or right, the opinion, as to the existence of
such custom or right, of persons who would be likely to know of its existence if it existed, are
relevant.
Explanation. The expression ―general custom or right‖ includes custom or rights common to any
considerable class of persons.
Illustration
The right of the villagers of a particular village to use the water of a particular well is a general
right within the meaning of this Article.
63. Opinion as to usages, tenets, etc., when relevant. When the Court has to form an opinion
as to—
the usages and tenets of any body of men or family,
the constitution and government of any religious or charitable foundation, or
the meaning of words or terms used in particular districts or by particular classes of people.
the opinions of person having special means of knowledge thereon, are relevant facts.
64. Opinion on relationship when relevant. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the
relationship of one person to another, the opinion, expressed by conduct, as to the existence of
such relationship, of any person who, as a member of the family or otherwise, has special
means of knowledge on the subject, is a relevant fact;
Provided that such opinion shall not be sufficient to prove a marriage in proceedings under the
Divorce Act, 1869 (IV of 1869), or in prosecutions under section 494 or 495 of the Pakistan
Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860).
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A and B were married.
The fact that they were usually received and treated by their friends as husband and wife, is
relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A was the legitimate son of B. The fact that A was always treated
as such by members of the family, is relevant.
COMMENTARY
Family affairs. Best evidence. Best evidence regarding family affairs, would be that of a close
relative of both the parties. Witness produced by plaintiff claiming that he was related to both
parties yet he could not tell parentage of father of parties and admitted in cross-examination
that his nephew was married to plaintiff‘s daughter. Evidence of such witness did not inspire
confidence and thus, same could not be relied upon.6
Witnesses deposing as to relationship of parties did not belong to the concerned village and
were not on visiting terms with the relevant families. Such persons would not be presumed to
have special means of knowledge as to the relationship of parties concerned. Concurrent
findings of Courts below on such aspect of the case was eminently just, which neither suffered
from any misreading of evidence nor any non-reading of evidence nor was in defiance of any
rule of appraisement of evidence. Concurrent findings of Courts below were affirmed in
circumstances.7
Conduct evidence. Opinion of a person expressed by conduct. Evidentiary value. Person whose
opinion was sought to be given in evidence, must be proved to have special means of
knowledge and then alone his opinion would be evidence. Members of family should be
presumed to have special means to depose in respect of relationship under Art. 64, Qanun-e-
Shahadat, 1984.8
65. Grounds of opinion when relevant. Whenever the opinion of any living person is relevant,
the grounds on which such opinion is based are also relevant.
Illustration
An expert may give an account of experiments performed by him for the purpose of forming his
opinion.
CHARACTER WHEN RELEVANT
66. In civil cases character to prove conduct imputed irrelevant. In civil cases the fact that the
character of any person concerned is such as to render probable or improbable any conduct
imputed to him is irrelevant, except insofar as such character appears from facts otherwise
relevant.
67. In criminal cases previous good character relevant. In criminal proceedings the fact that the
person accused is of a good character is relevant.
68. Previous bad character not relevant, except in reply. In criminal proceedings the fact that
the accused person has a bad character is irrelevant, unless evidence has been given that he
has a good character, in which case it becomes relevant.
Explanation 1. This Articles does not apply to cases in which the bad character of any person is
itself a fact in issue.
Explanation 2. A previous conviction is relevant as evidence of bad character.
69. Character as affecting damages. In civil cases the fact that the character of any person is
such as to affect the amount of damages which he ought to receive, is relevant.
Explanation. In Articles 66, 67, 68 and 69 the word ―character‖ includes both reputation and
disposition: but, except as provided in Article 68, evidence may be given only of general
reputation and general disposition, and not of particular acts by which reputation of disposition
were shown.
CHAPTER IV
OF ORAL EVIDENCE
70. Proof of facts by oral evidence. All facts except the contents of documents, may be proved
by oral evidence.
COMMENTARY
Evidence, oral and documentary. Misreading by Courts below. Effect. Three Courts below
misread evidence on the question whether plaintiffs were daughters of vendors and failed to
give proper consideration to material facts which had direct bearing on such question. Admitted
piece of evidence viz. Nikahnamas of plaintiffs showed vendor as the father of plaintiffs; such
document was corroborated by the statement of Pesh Imam who had performed Nikah of
plaintiffs and such statement was further reinforced by Nikah Registrar who had registered
Nikah of plaintiffs. Nothing was brought out in cross-examination to shake evidence of those
witnesses who were independent witnesses. Birth certificates being not clear were rightly
discarded by Courts below. If Birth certificates were to be excluded, documentary and oral
evidence was sufficient for concluding that plaintiffs were daughters of vendor. No reliable
evidence was produced in rebuttal. Evidence produced by vendees on such question did not
inspire confidence. Veracity of statement of plaintiff about the pedigree of her father was not
challenged in cross-examination. Plaintiffs were proved to be the daughters of vendor. Three
Courts below having misread evidence on the question of relationship of plaintiffs with vendor
had failed to give proper consideration to material facts. Findings of three Courts below on such
question was set aside and plaintiffs were proved to be the daughters of vendors on basis of
material on record.9
Proof of facts by oral evidence. Oral statement would not be of any value where documentary
evidence in support of such fact being available was not produced.1
71. Oral evidence must be direct. Oral evidence must, in all cases whatever be direct, that is to
say—
If it refers to a fact which could be seen, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he saw
it;
If it refers to a fact which could be heard, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he
heard it;
If it refers to a fact which could be perceived by an other sense or in any other manner, it must
be the evidence of a witness who says he perceived it by that sense or in that manner;
If it refers to an opinion or to the grounds on which that opinion is held, it must be the
evidence of the person who holds that opinion on those grounds:
Provided that the opinions of experts expressed in any treatise commonly offered for sale, and
the grounds on which such opinions are held, may be proved by the production of such treaties
if the author is dead, or cannot be found, or has become incapable of giving evidence, or
cannot be called as a witness without an amount of delay or expense which the Court regards
as unreasonable:
Provided further that, if oral evidence refers to the existence or condition of any material thing
other than a document, the Court may, if it thinks fit, require the production of such material
thing for its inspection:
Provided further that, if a witness is dead, or cannot be found or has become incapable of
giving evidence, or his attendance cannot be procured without an amount of delay or expense
which under the circumstances of the case the Court regards as unreasonable, a party shall
have the right to produce shahadaala-alshahadah by which a witness can appoint two witnesses
to depose on his behalf, except in the case of Hudood.
COMMENTARY
Application of Art. 71, Qanun-e-Shahadat, 1984. Oral evidence means the evidence recorded by
the Court. Article 71 of Qanun-e-Shahadat, 1984 applies to oral evidence which means the
evidence recorded by the Court and does not apply to first information report lodged with the
police.2
CHAPTER V
OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
72. Proof of contents of documents. The contents of documents may be proved either by
primary or by secondary evidence.
COMMENTARY
Arts. 72, 75, 78, 79. Court can consider a document admissible if a document produced is on
record but Presiding Officer has not put exhibit number on the document. 2a
Evidence, admissibility of. Petitioner contended that copies of forms regarding sanction of plan
were not public documents and could not have been exhibited without formal proof. Held: No
objection having been raised when such documents were tendered in evidence and exhibited,
no objection could be allowed to be raised at later stage in revision.3
Non-production of original document before Settlement Authorities. Effect. Joint allotted of shop
in dispute. Defendant claimed that plaintiff had surrendered his claim to the extent of his ½
share in shop in question and had executed deed of surrender in his favour. Such deed,
however, having not been placed before Settlement Authorities, could not be verified and
accepted after notice without recording the statement of plaintiff. Deed of surrender, therefore,
had no value and on basis thereof, P.T.D. for the whole shop should not have been issued in
favour of defendant alone. Permanent Transfer Deed issued in favour of defendant to the
extent of plaintiff‘s share in shop in question, was thus not valid.4
73. Primary evidence. ―Primary evidence‖ means the document itself produced for the
inspection of the Court.
Explanation 1. Where a document is executed in several parts, each part is primary evidence of
the document.
Where a document is executed in counterpart, each counterpart being executed by one or some
of the parties only, each counterpart is primary evidence as against the parties executing it.
Explanation 2. Where a number of documents are all made by one uniform process, as in the
case of printing, lithography or photography, each is primary evidence of the contents of the
rest; but, where they are all copies of a common original, they are not primary evidence of the
contents of the original.
Illustration
A person is shown to have been in possession of a number of placards, all printed at one time
from one original. Any one of the placards is primary evidence of the contents of any other, but
no one of them is primary evidence of the contents of the original.
COMMENTARY
To prove contents of documents, claimant is bound to produce primary or secondary evidence
unless execution of the same is admitted by the opponent.5
74. Secondary evidence. — ―Secondary evidence‖ means and includes—
(1) certified copies given under the provisions hereinafter contained;
(2) copies made from the original by mechanical processes which in themselves insure the
accuracy of the copy, and copies compared with such copies;
(3) copies made from or compared with the original;
(4) counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not execute them;
(5) oral accounts of the contents of a document given by some person who has himself seen it.
Illustrations
(a) A photograph of an original is secondary evidence of its contents though the two have not
been compared, if it is proved that the thing photographed was the original.
(b) A copy, compared with a copy of a letter made by a copying machine is secondary evidence
of the contents of the letter, if it is shown that the copy made by the copying machine was
made from the original.
(c) A copy transcribed from a copy, but afterwards compared with the original is secondary
evidence; but the copy not so compared is not secondary evidence of the original, although the
copy from which it was transcribed was compared with the original.
(d) Neither an oral account of a copy compared with the original, nor an oral account of a
photograph or machine-copy of the original, is secondary evidence of the original.
COMMENTARY
Report of Magistrate would be enough to justify attraction of Art. 76(c) for purpose of
production of secondary evidence in terms of Art. 74.4a
Qanun-e-Shahadat Order is applicable to Provincially Administered Tribal Areas including
Malakand Division. Murder cases cannot be decided on basis of Qasamat as it is not recognized
as a mode of evidence under Qanun-e-Shahadat Order. Courts in PATA should follow provisions
of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, particularly Art. 17, in their true perspective.
75. Proof of documents by primary evidence. — Documents must be proved by primary
evidence except in the cases hereinafter mentioned.
COMMENTARY
Execution of sale-deed by a person claiming to be holding power-of-attorney from the owner.
Owner denying having executed any power-of-attorney in favour of said person. Original
power-of-attorney was not produced in Court, Photostat copy produced could not, in the
absence of original, be taken into consideration. Person holding purported power-of-attorney
did not appear in Court to contest suit by the owner (plaintiff). Defendant (vendee)
acknowledge in his statement before Court that he was not supplied original power-of-attorney
at the time of execution of sale-supplied original power-of-attorney at the time of execution of
sale-deed. Power-of-attorney was thus, a forged document and person executing sale-deed on
basis thereof, had no authority to execute any sale-deed on behalf of the owner (plaintiff). Sale-
deed executed in favour of vendee-defendant was, thus, not valid.6
76. Cases in which secondary evidence relating to document may be given. — Secondary
evidence may be given of the existence, condition or contents of a document in the following
cases:—
(a) when the original is shown or appears to be in the possession or power of the person
against whom the document is sought to be proved, or of any person out of reach of, or not
subject to, the process of the Court; or of any person legally bound to produce it; and when,
after the notice mentioned in Article 77 such person does not produce it;
(b) when the existence, condition or contents of the original have been proved to be admitted
in writing by the person against whom it is proved or by his representative-in-interest;
(c) when the original has been destroyed or lost, or when the party offering evidence of its
contents cannot, for any other reason not arising from his own default or neglect, produce it in
reasonable time;
(d) when, due to the volume or bulk of the original, copies thereof have been made by means
of microfilming or other modern devices;
(e) when the original is of such a nature as not to be easily movable;
(f) when the original is a public document within the meaning of Article 85;
(g) when the original is a document of which a certified copy is permitted by this Order, or by
any other law in force in Pakistan, to be given in evidence;
(h) when the originals consists of numerous accounts or other documents which cannot
conveniently be examined in Court, and the fact to be proved is the general result of the whole
collection;
(i) when an original document forming part of a judicial record is not available and only a
certified copy thereof is available, certified copy of that certified copy shall also be admissible as
a secondary evidence.
In cases (a), (c), (d) and (e), any secondary evidence of the contents of the document is
admissible.
In case (b), the written admission is admissible.
In case (f) or (g), certified copy of the document, but no other kind of secondary evidence, is
admissible.
In case (h), evidence may be given as to the general result of the documents by any person
who has examined them, and who is skilled in the examination of such document.
COMMENTARY
Secondary evidence of report of identification parade cannot be allowed or permitted to be
adduced when no effort had been made to locate the original report of identification parage.6a
77. Rules as to notice to produce. — Secondary evidence of the contents of the documents
referred to in Article 76, paragraph (a) shall not be given unless the party proposing to give
such secondary evidence has previously given to the party in whose possession or power the
document is, or to his advocate, such notice to produce it as is prescribed by law; and, if no
notice is prescribed by law, then such notice as the Court considers reasonable under the
circumstances of the case;
Provided that such notice shall not be required in order to render secondary evidence
admissible in any of the following cases, or in any other case in which the Court thinks fit to
dispense with it:—
(1) when the document to be proved is itself a notice;
(2) when, from the nature of the case, the adverse party must know that he will be required to
produce it;
(3) when it appears or is proved that the adverse party has obtained possession of the original
by fraud or force;
(4) when the adverse party or his agent has the original in Court;
(5) when the adverse party or his agent has admitted the loss of the document;
(6) when the person in possession of the document is out of reach of, or not subject to, the
process of the Court.