[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://na.gov.pk/uploads/documents/6926e060076ed_467.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

Constitution Section 86: Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing

provisions relating to financial matters, at any time when the
National Assembly stands dissolved, the Federal Government
may authorize expenditure from the Federal Consolidated Fund
in respect of the estimated expenditure for a period not exceeding
four months in any financial year, pending completion of the
procedure prescribed in Article 82 for the voting of grants and the
authentication of the schedule of authorized expenditure in
accordance with the provisions of Article 83 in relation to the
expenditure.
Supplementary
and excess
grants.
Votes on
account.
Power to
authorize
expenditure
when
Assembly
stands
dissolved.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN                        49
87.   (1)    Each House shall have a separate Secretariat :
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be construed as
preventing the creation of posts common to both Houses.
(2)
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] may by law regulate
the recruitment and the conditions of service of persons appoin-
ted to the secretarial staff of either House.
(3)    Until   provision   is   made   by
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora
(Parliament)] under clause (2), the Speaker or, as the case may
be, the Chairman may, with the approval of the President, make
rules
2
regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service, of
persons appointed to the secretarial staff of the National
Assembly or the Senate.
88.   (1)    The expenditure of the National Assembly and the
Senate within authorized appropriations shall be controlled by
the National Assembly or, as the case may be, the Senate acting
on the advice of its Finance Committee.
(2)    The Finance Committee shall consist of the Speaker
or, as the case may be, the Chairman, the Minister of Finance and
such other members as may be elected thereto by the National
Assembly or, as the case may be, the Senate.
(3)    The Finance Committee may make rules
3
for regulat-
ing its procedure.
Ordinances
89.   (1)    The President may, except when the
4
[Senate or]
National Assembly is in session, if satisfied that circumstances
exist which render it necessary to take immediate action, make
and promulgate an Ordinance as the circumstances may require.
(2)    An Ordinance promulgated under this Article shall
have the same force and effect as an Act of
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora
(Parliament)] and shall be subject to like restrictions as the power
Secretariats of
Majlis-e-
Shoora
(Parliament).
Finance
Committee.
Power of
President to
promulgate
Ordinances.
50                         CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Seefootnote 9 on page 5, supra.
2
For the National Assembly Secretariat (Recruitment) Rules, 1973, seeGaz. of Pak.
1973, Ext., Part-II, pp. 2279–2286.
For the Senate Secretariat (Recruitment) Rules, 1973, see ibid., pp. 2301–2307.
3
For the National Assembly (Finance Committee) Rules, 1973, seeGaz. of Pak. 1973,
Ext., Part-II, pp. 2451–2454.
For the Senate (Finance Committee) Rules, 1973, see ibid.,pp. 2479–2482.
4
Ins. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 27.
of
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] to make law, but every such
Ordinance –
(a)    shall be laid–
(i)    before   the   National   Assembly   if   it
2
[contains provisions dealing with all or
any of the matters specified in clause (2) of
Article 73], and shall stand repealed at the
expiration of
3
[one hundred and twenty
days] from its promulgation or, if before
the expiration of that period a resolution
disapproving it is passed by the Assembly,
upon the passing of that resolution
4
[:]
5
[Provided that the National Assembly
may by a resolution extend the Ordinance
for a further period of one hundred and
twenty days and it shall stand repealed at
the expiration of the extended period, or if
before the expiration of that period a
resolution disapproving it is passed by the
Assembly, upon the passing of that
resolution:
Provided further that extension for
further period may be made only once;]
(ii)    before both Houses if it
6
[does not contain
provisions dealing with any of the matters
referred to in sub-paragraph (i)], and shall
stand repealed at the expiration of
3
[one
hundred   and   twenty   days]   from   its
promulgation or, if before the expiration of
that period a resolution disapproving it is
passed by either House, upon the passing
of that resolution
7
[:]
8
[Provided that either House may by a
resolution extend it for a further period of
one hundred and twenty days and it shall
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN                        51
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Seefootnote 9 on page 5, supra.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Second Amdt.) Order, 1985 (P.O. No. 20 of 1985), Art. 2,
for certain words.
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 27, for “four
months”.
4
Subs. ibid., for the semi-colon.
5
New provisos ins. ibid.
6
Subs. by P.O. No. 20 of 1985 Art. 2, for certain words.
7
Subs. by the Act No. 10 of 2010, s. 27, for “;and”.
8
New provisos ins. ibid.
stand repealed at the expiration of the
extended period, or if before the expiration
of that period a resolution disapproving it is
passed by a House, upon the passing of that
resolution:
Provided further that extension for a
further period may be made only once;
and]
(b)    may be withdrawn at any time by the President.
1
[(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of clause (2),—
(a)    an Ordinance laid before the National Assembly under
sub-paragraph (i) of paragraph (a) of clause (2) shall
be deemed to be a Bill introduced in the National
Assembly; and
(b)    an Ordinance laid before both Houses under sub-
paragraph (ii) of paragraph (a) of clause (2) shall be
deemed to be a Bill introduced in the House where it
was first laid.]
C
HAPTER3.–THEFEDERALGOVERNMENT
2
[
3
[90.(1)  Subject to the Constitution, the executive authority of
the Federation shall be exercised in the name of the President by
the Federal Government, consisting of the Prime Minister and the
Federal Ministers, which shall act through the Prime Minister,
who shall be the chief executive of the Federation.
(2)    In the performance of his functions under the
Constitution, the Prime Minister may act either directly or
through the Federal Ministers.]
4
[91.(1)   There shall be a Cabinet of Ministers, with the Prime
Minister at its head, to aid and advise the President in the exercise
of his functions.
The Federal
Government.
The Cabinet.
52                         CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.)Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 27, for
“clause (3)”.
2
Subs. by P.O. No. 14 of 1985 Art. 2 and Sch., for Articles “90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95 and 96”.
3
Subs. by the Act 10 of 2010,s. 28, for “Article 90”.
4
Subs. ibid.,s. 29, for “Article 91”.
(2) The National Assembly shall meet on the twenty-first
day following the day on which a general election to the
Assembly is held, unless sooner summoned by the President.
(3) After the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker,
the National Assembly shall, to the exclusion of any other
business, proceed to elect without debate one of its Muslim
members to be the Prime Minister.
(4) The Prime Minister shall be elected by the votes of the
majority of the total membership of the National Assembly:
Provided that, if no member secures such majority in the
first poll, a second poll shall be held between the members who
secure the two highest numbers of votes in the first poll and the
member who secures a majority of votes of the members present
and voting shall be declared to have been elected as Prime
Minister:
Provided further that, if the number of votes secured by
two or more members securing the highest number of votes is
equal, further poll shall be held between them until one of them
secures a majority of votes of the members present and voting.
(5) The member elected under clause (4) shall be called
upon by the President to assume the office of Prime Minister and
he shall, before entering upon the office, make before the
President oath in the form set out in the Third Schedule:
Provided that there shall be no restriction on the number
of terms for the office of the Prime Minister.
(6) The Cabinet, together with the Ministers of State, shall
be collectively responsible  to the Senate and the National
Assembly.
(7) The Prime Minister shall hold office during the pleasure
of the President, but the President shall not exercise his powers
under this clause unless he is satisfied that the Prime Minister
does not command the confidence of the majority of the members
of the National Assembly, in which case he shall summon the
National Assembly and require the Prime Minister to obtain a
vote of confidence from the Assembly.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN                        53
(8)        The Prime Minister may, by writing under his hand
addressed to the President, resign his office.
(9)        A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months
is not a member of the National Assembly shall, at the expiration
of that period, cease to be a Minister and shall not before the
dissolution of that Assembly be again appointed a Minister unless
he is elected a member of that Assembly:
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply
to a Minister who is member of the Senate.
(10)      Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as
disqualifying the Prime Minister or any other Minister or a
Minister of State for continuing in office during any period
during which the National Assembly stands dissolved, or as
preventing the appointment of any person as Prime Minister or
other Minister or a Minister of State during any such period.]
92.        (1)  Subject to clauses
1
[(9) and (10)] of Article 91, the
President shall appoint Federal Ministers and Ministers of State
from amongst the members of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) on
the advice of the Prime Minister:
Provided that the number of Federal Ministers and
Ministers of State who are members of the Senate shall not at any
time exceed one-fourth of the number of Federal Ministers
2
[:]
3
[Provided further that the total strength of the Cabinet,
including Ministers of State, shall not exceed eleven percent of
the total membership of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament):
Provided also that the aforesaid amendment shall be
effective from the next general election held after the
commencement of the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment)
Act, 2010.].
(2) Before entering upon office, a Federal Minister or
Minister of State shall make before the President oath in the form
set out in the Third Schedule.
Federal
Ministers and
Ministers of
State.
54                         CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 30, for “(7)
and (8)”.
2
Subs. ibid., for the full-stop.
3
Provisos ins. ibid.
(3)    A Federal Minister or Minister of State may, by
writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his
office or may be removed from office by the President on the
advice of the Prime Minister.
93.    (1)    The President may, on the advice of the Prime
Minister, appoint not more than
1
[seven] Advisers, on such
terms and conditions as he may determine.
(2)    The provisions of Article 57 shall also apply to an
Adviser.