[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://na.gov.pk/uploads/documents/63ea176f52421_610.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

Constitution Section 229: The President or the Governor of a Province may, or if two

fifths of its total membership so requires, a House or a Provincial
Assembly shall, refer to the Islamic Council for advice any ques-
tion as to whether a proposed law is or is not repugnant to the
Injunctions of Islam.
230. (1)    The functions of the Islamic Council shall be–
(a)    to   make   recommendations   to
3
[Majlis-e-Shoora
(Parliament)] and the Provincial Assemblies as to the
ways and means of enabling and encouraging the
Muslims of Pakistan to order their lives individually
and collectively in all respects in accordance with the
principles and concepts of Islam as enunciated in the
Holy Quran and Sunnah;
(b)    to advise a House, a Provincial Assembly, the
President or a Governor on any question referred to
the Council as to whether  proposed law is or is not
repugnant to the Injunctions of Islam;
(c)    to make recommendations as to the measures for
bringing existing laws into conformity with the
Injunctions of Islam and the stages by which such
measures should be brought into effect; and
Reference by
3
[Majlis-e-
Shoora
(Parliament)],
etc., to Islamic
Council.
Functions of
the Islamic
Council.
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 85, for “four”.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Third Amdt.) Order, 1982 (P.O. No. 13 of 1982), Art. 2, for
“clause (4)”.
3
See footnote 9 on page 5, supra.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN                      129
(d)    to compile in a suitable form, for the guidance of
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)] and the Provincial
Assemblies, such Injunctions of Islam as can be given
legislative effect.
(2)    When, under Article 229, a question is referred by a
House, a Provincial Assembly, the President or a Governor to the
Islamic Council, the Council shall, within fifteen days thereof,
inform the House, the Assembly, the President or the Governor,
as the case may be, of the period within which the Council
expects to be able to furnish that advice.
(3)    Where a House, a Provincial Assembly, the President
or the Governor, as the case may be, considers that, in the public
interest, the making of the proposed law in relation to which the
question arose should not be postponed until the advice of the
Islamic Council is furnished, the law may be made before the
advice is furnished :
Provided that, where a law is referred for advice to the
Islamic Council and the Council advises that the law is repugnant
to the Injunctions of Islam, the House or, as the case may be, the
Provincial Assembly, the President or the Governor shall
reconsider the law so made.
(4)    The Islamic Council shall submit its final report
within seven years of its appointment, and shall submit an
annual interim report. The report, whether interim or final, shall
be laid for discussion before both Houses and each Provincial
Assembly within six months of its receipt, and
1
[Majlis-e-Shoora
(Parliament)] and the Assembly, after considering the report,
shall enact laws in respect thereof within a period of two years of
the final report.