[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 235: Possession   of   instrument   or   material   for   the   purpose   of   using   the   same   for

counterfeiting coin ; if Pakistan coin. Whoever is in possession of any instrument or material, for the
purpose of using the same for counterfeiting coin, or knowing or having reason to believe that the same
is intended to be used for that purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
1
Illustrations (d) and (e) omitted by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Ordinance, 1981 (27 of 1981), s. 3 and II Sch.
2
Subs. by A. 0., 1961, Art. 2 and Sch., for" the Queen's coin" (w.e.f. 23rd March, 1956).
3
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine ;
and if the coin to be counterfeited is
1
[Pakistan coin], shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
236. Abetting  in  Pakistan  the  counterfeiting  out  of  Pakistan  of  coin. Whoever,  being within
2
[Pakistan], abets the counterfeiting of coin out of
2
[Pakistan] shall be punished in the same manner as
if he abetted the counterfeiting of such coin within
2
[Pakistan].
237. Import or export of counterfeit coin. Whoever imports into
2
[Pakistan], or exports there-
from, any counterfeit coin, knowingly or having reason to believe that the same is counterfeit, shall  be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
238. Import  or  export  of  counterfeits  of  Pakistan  coin. Whoever  imports  into
2
[Pakistan],  or
exports therefrom, any counterfeit coin which he knows or has reason to believe to be a counterfeit of
1
[Pakistan  coin],  shall  be  punished with
3
[imprisonment for life], or with  imprisonment of  either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
239. Delivery  of  coin,  possessed  with  knowledge  that  it  is  counterfeit. Whoever,  having  any
counterfeit  coin,  which  at  the time when  he  became  possessed  of it he  know  to  be  counterfeit,
fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, delivers the same to any person, or attempts
to induce any person to receive it, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
240. Delivery  of  Pakistan  coin  possessed  with  knowledge  that  it  is  counterfeit. Whoever,
having any counterfeit coin, which is a counterfeit of
1
[Pakistan coin], and which, at the time when  he
became possessed of it, he knew to be a counterfeit of
1
[Pakistan coin], fraudulently or with intent that
fraud may be committed, delivers the same to any person, or attempts to induce any person to receive
it, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.