[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 186: Obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions

2
[(1)] Whoever voluntarily
obstructs any public servant in the discharge of his public functions, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to
2
[one year], or with fine which may extend to
2
[fifty thousand]
rupees, or with both.
2
["(2) Whoever intentionally hampers, misleads,  jeopardizes  or  defeats  an investigation,  inquiry or
prosecution  or  issues  a  false  or  defective  report  in  a  case  under any law  for the time being in  force  shall  be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend ot three years or with fine or with both."]
187. Omission  to  assist  public  servant  when bound  by  law  to  give  assistance. Whoever, being
bound by law to render or furnish assistance to any public servant in the execution of his public duty, intentionally
omits to give such assistance, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
month, or with fine which may extend to
1
[six hundred rupees], or with both ;
and if such assistance be demanded of him by a public servant legally competent to make such demand for
the purposes of executing any process lawfully issued by a Court of Justice, or of preventing the commission  of
an offence, or of suppressing a riot, or affray, or of apprehending a person charged with or guilty of an offence,
or  of having escaped  from lawful custody,  shall  be punished with simple imprisonment for  a  term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to
1
[one thousand five hundred rupees], or with both.
188. Disobedience  to  order  duly  promulgated  by  public  servant. Whoever, knowing that, by  an
order promulgated by a public servant lawfully empowered to promulgate such order, he is directed to abstain
from  a  certain  act,  or  to  take  certain  order with certain  property  in his possession  or  under his management,
disobeys such direction,
shall, if such disobedience causes or tends to cause obstruction, annoyance or injury, or risk of obstruction,
annoyance or injury, to any persons lawfully employed, be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which
may extend to one month or with fine which may extend to
1
[six hundred rupees], or with both ;
and if such disobedience causes or tends to cause danger to human life, health or safety, or causes or tends
to cause a riot or affray, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to six months, or with fine which may extend to
1
[three thousand rupees], or with both.
Explanation. It is not necessary that the offender should intend to produce harm, or contemplate his
disobedience as likely to produce harm. It is sufficient that he knows of the order which he disobeys, and that
his disobedience produces, or is likely to produce, harm.
Illustration
An order is promulgated by a public servant lawfully empowered to promulgate such order, directing that a
religious procession  shall not pass down a  certain  street.  A knowingly disobeys the order, and thereby  causes
danger of riot. A has committed the offence defined in this section.
1
Subs. by Ord. 86 of 02, s. 2 & Sch. I.
2
Renumber, subs. and added by Act XLIV of 2016, s. 4.
189. Threat  of  injury  to  public  servant. Whoever  holds  out  any  threat  of injury to  any public
servant, or to any person in whom he believes that public servant to be interested for the purpose of
inducing  that public servant  to  do  any act, or  to  forbear  or  delay  to  do  any act, connected with the
exercise of the public functions of such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.