[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/wp-content/uploads/2026/01/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT-ORDER1984-Amendment-up-to-date-2025.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

QSO Section 58: Fraud or collusion in obtaining judgment, or Incompetency of Court, may be

proved. — Any party to a suit or other proceeding may show that any judgment, order or decree which
is relevant under Articles 54, 55 or 56, and which has been proved by the adverse party, was delivered
by a Court not competent to deliver it, or was obtained by fraud or collusion.
OPINION OF THIRD PERSONS WHEN RELEVANT
59. Opinions of experts.— When the Court has to form an opinion upon a point of foreign
law, or of science, or art,
6
[or bomb disposal] or as to identity of hand-writing or finger impressions,
7
[or as to authenticity and integrity of electronic documents made by or through an information system]
the opinions upon that point of persons specially skilled in such foreign law, science or art,
8
[or bomb
disposal]  or in questions as to identity of hand-writing or finger impressions
9
[or as to the functioning,
specifications, programming and operations of information systems, are relevant facts.]
Such persons are called experts.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether the death of A was caused by poison. The opinion of experts as to the
symptoms produced by the poison by which A is supposed to have died, are relevant.
(b)  The question is, whether A, at the time of doing a certain act, was by reason of
unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he was doing what was
either wrong or contrary to law.
6
Word Inserted by Federal Act, No. XXXIX of 2023 S. 2, dated 5/8/2023
7
Ins. certain words by Ord. No L1 of 2002, s. 29 and schedule.
8
Word Inserted by Federal Act, No. XXXIX of 2023 S. 2, dated 5/8/2023
9
Subs. ibid for “are relevant facts”
Page 34 of
59
The opinions of experts upon the question whether the symptoms exhibited by A commonly show unsoundness of
mind, and whether such unsoundness of mind usually renders persons incapable of knowing the nature of the acts
which they do, or of knowing that what they do is either wrong or contrary to law, are relevant.
(c) The  question is, whether a certain document was written by  A. Another document is produced
which is proved or admitted to have been written by A.
The  opinions  of  experts  on  the  question  whether  the  two  documents  were  written  by  the  same
person or by different persons, are relevant.
60. Facts bearing upon opinions of experts. — Facts, not otherwise relevant, are relevant
if they support or are inconsistent with the opinions of experts, when such opinions are relevant.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A was poisoned by a certain poison. The fact that other persons, who
were poisoned by that poison, exhibited certain symptoms which experts affirm or deny to be the
symptoms that poison, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether an obstruction to a harbour is caused by a certain sea wall.
The fact that other harbours similarly situated in other respects, but where there were no such
sea-walls, began to be obstructed at about the same time, is relevant.
61. Opinion as to hand-writing when relevant. — When the Court has to form an
opinion  as  to  the  person  by  whom  any  document  was  written  or  signed,  the  opinion  of  any  parson
acquainted with the hand-writing of the person by whom it is supposed to be written or signed that it
was or it was not written or signed by that person, is a relevant fact.
Explanation.—A person is said to be acquainted with the hand-writing of another person when
he has seen that person write, or when he has received documents purporting to be written by that person
in answer to documents written by himself or under his authority and addressed to that person, or when,
in  the  ordinary  course  of  business,  documents  purporting  to  be  written  by  that  person  have  been
habitually submitted to him.
Illustrations
The question is, whether a given letter is in the hand-writing of A, a merchant in London.
B  is  a  merchant  in  Peshawar,  who  has  written  letters  addressed  to  A  and  received  letters
purporting to be written by him, C is B’s clerk, whose duty it was to examine and file B’s
correspondence. D is B’s broker, to whom B habitually submitted the letters purporting to be
written by A for the purpose of advising him thereon.
The opinion of B, C and D on the question whether the letter is in the hand-writing of A
are relevant, though neither B, C or D ever saw A write.
62. Opinion as to existence of right or custom, when relevant. — When the Court has
to form an opinion as to the existence of any general custom or right, the opinion, as to the existence of
such custom or right, of persons who would be likely to know of its existence if it existed, are relevant.
Page 35 of
59
Explanation. —The expression “general custom or right” includes customs or rights common
to any considerable class of persons.
Illustrations
The right of the villagers of a particular village to use the water of a particular well is a general right
within the meaning of this Article.
63. Opinion  as  to  usage,  tenets, etc.,  when  relevant: when  the  Court  has  to  form  an
opinion as to—
the  usages  and tenets  of any body of men  or family, the  constitution and government of any
religious or charitable foundation, or
the meaning of words to terms used in particular districts or by particular classes of people.
The opinions of persons having special means of knowledge thereon, are relevant facts.
64. Opinion on relationship when relevant. — When the Court has to form an opinion
as to the relationship of one person to another, the opinion, expressed by conduct, as to the existence of
such relationship,  of  any  person  who,  as  a  member  of  the  family  or  otherwise, has  special  means  of
knowledge on the subject, is a relevant fact:
Provided that such opinion shall not be sufficient to prove a marriage in proceedings under the
Divorce Act, 1869 (IV of 1869), or in prosecutions under Section 494 or 495 of the Pakistan Penal Code
(Act XLV of 1860).
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A and B were married.
The fact that they were usually received and treated by their friends as husband and
wife, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A was the legitimate son of B. The fact that A was always
treated as such by members of the family, is relevant.
65. Grounds of opinion when relevant. — Whenever the opinion of any living person is
relevant, the grounds on which such opinion is based are also relevant.
Illustration
An expert may give an account of experiments performed by him for the purpose of forming his opinion.
CHARACTER WHEN RELEVANT
66. In civil cases  character to prove  conduct imputed irrelevant. — In civil cases
the  fact  that  the  character  of  any  person  concerned  is  such  as  to  render  probable  or  improbable  any
conduct imputed to him is irrelevant, except in so far as such character appears from facts otherwise
relevant.
67. In  criminal  cases  previous  good  character relevant. — In  criminal  proceedings
the fact that the person accused is of a good character is relevant.
68. Previous bad character not relevant, except in reply.— In criminal proceedings
Page 36 of
59
the fact that the accused person has a bad character is irrelevant, unless evidence has been given that he
has a good character, in which case it become relevant.
Explanation 1. — This Article does not apply to cases in which the bad character of any person
is itself a fact in issue.
Explanation 2. —A previous conviction is relevant as evidence of bad character.
69. Character as affecting damages. — In civil cases  the  fact that the character of any
person is such as to affect the amount of damages which he ought to receive, is relevant.
Explanation: — In Articles 66, 67, 68 and 69, the word “character” includes both reputation
and disposition; but, except as provided in Article 68, evidence may be given only of general reputation
and general disposition, and not of particular acts by which reputation or disposition were shown.
Page 37 of 59
CHAPTER IV
OF ORAL EVIDENCE
70. Proof of facts by oral evidence. — All facts, except the contents of documents, may
be proved by oral evidence.
71. Oral evidence must be direct. — Oral evidence must, in all cases whatever be direct,
that is to say—
If it refers to a fact which could be seen, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he saw
it;
If it refers to a fact which could be heard, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he heard
it;
If it refers to a fact which could be perceived by any other sense or in any other manner, it must
be the evidence of a witness who says he perceived it by that sense or in that manner;
If it refers to an opinion or to the grounds on which that opinion is held, it must be the evidence
of the person who holds that opinion on those grounds:
Provided that the opinions of experts expressed in any treaties commonly offered for sale, and
the grounds on which such opinions are held, may be proved by the production of such treaties if the
author is dead, or cannot be found, or has become incapable of giving evidence, or cannot be called as
a witness without an amount of delay or expense which the Court regards as unreasonable:
Provided further that, if oral evidence refers to the existence or condition of any material thing
other than a document, the Court may, if it thinks fit, require the production of such material thing for
its inspection:
Provided further that, if a witness is dead, or cannot be found or has become incapable of giving
evidence, or his attendance cannot, be procured without an amount of delay or expense which under the
circumstances  of  the  case  the  Court  regards  as  unreasonable,  a  party  shall  have  the  right to  produce,
shahada  ala  al-shahadah  by which  a  witness  can appoint two witnesses to depose on his  behalf,
except in the case of Hudood.
CHAPTER V
OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
72. Proof of contents of documents. — The contents of documents may be proved either
by primary or by secondary evidence.
73. Primary evidence. — “Primary evidence” means the document itself produced for the
inspection of the Court.
Explanation 1. —Where a document is executed in several parts, each part is primary evidence
of the document.
Where a document is executed in counterpart, each counterpart being executed by one or some
of the parties only, each counterpart is primary evidence as against the parties executing it.
Page 38 of 59
Explanation 2. —Where a number of documents are all made by one uniform process, as in
the case of printing, lithography or photography, each is primary evidence of the contents of the rest;
but where they are all copies of a common original, they are not primary evidence of the contents of the
original.
10
[Explanation  3.—A  printout  or  other form  of  output  of an  automated  information  system
shall  not  be  denied  the  status  of  primary  evidence  solely  for  the  reason  that  it  was  generated,  sent,
received or stored in electronic form if the automated information system was in working order at all
material  times  and,  for  the  purposes  hereof,  in  the  absence  of  evidence  to  the  contrary,  it  shall  be
presumed that the automated information system was in working order at all material times.
Explanation  4.—A  printout  or  other  form  of  reproduction  of  an electronic  document,  other
than a document mentioned in Explanation 3 above, first generated, sent, received or stored in electronic
form, shall be treated as primary evidence where a security procedure was applied thereto at the time it
was generated, sent, received or stored.]
Illustration
A person is shown to have been in possession of a number of placards, all printed at one time
from one original. Any one of the placards is primary evidence of the contents of any other, but no
one of them is primary evidence of the contents of the original.
74. Secondary evidence. — “Secondary evidence” means and includes—
(1) certified copies given under the provisions hereinafter contained;
(2) copies  made  from  the  original  by  mechanical  processes  which  in  themselves ensure the
accuracy of the copy, and copies compared with such copies;
(3) copies made from or compared with the original;
(4) counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not execute them;
(5) oral accounts of the contents of a document given by some person who has himself seen
it.
Illustrations
(a) A photograph of an original is secondary evidence of its contents though the two have
not been compared, if it is proved that the thing photographed was the original.
(b) A  copy,  compared  with  a  copy  of  a  letter  made  by  a  copying  machine  is  secondary
evidence of the contents of the letter, if it is shown that the copy made by the copying
machine was made from the original.
(c) A  copy  transcribed  from  a  copy,  but  afterwards  compared  with  the  original,  is
secondary  evidence;  but  the  copy  not  so  compared  is  not  secondary  evidence  of  the
original,  although  the  copy  from  which  it  was  transcribed  was  compared  with  the
original.
10
Added “Explanations 3 and 4 in Article 73” by Ord. No. L1 of 2002, s. 29 and schedule
Page 39 of 59
(d) Neither an oral account of a copy compared with the original, nor an oral account of
a photograph or machine-copy of the original, is secondary evidence of the original.
75. Proof of documents by primary evidence. — Documents must be proved by
primary evidence except in the cases hereinafter mentioned.