[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CPC Section 68: Power to prescribe rules for transferring to Collector execution

of certain decrees.– The
3
[Provincial Government] may,
4
[* * * * * * * *], declare,
by notification in the
5
[official Gazette], that in any local area the execution of
decrees in cases in which a Court has ordered any immoveable property to be
sold, or the execution of any particular kind of such decrees, or the execution of
decrees ordering the sale of any particular kind of, or interest in, immoveable
property, shall be transferred to the Collector.
69. Provisions of Third Schedule to apply.– The provisions set forth in
the Third Schedule shall apply to all cases in which the execution of a decree
has been transferred under the last preceding section.
70. Rules of procedure.–
(1) The
6
[Provincial Government] may make rules
consistent with the aforesaid provisions
__
(a) for the transmission of the decree from the Court to the Collector,
and for regulating the procedure of the Collector and his
subordinates in executing the same, and for retransmitting the
decree from the Collector to the Court;
(b) conferring upon the Collector or any gazetted subordinate of the
Collector all or any of the powers which the Court might exercise in
the execution of the decree if the execution thereof had not been
transferred to the Collector;
(c) providing for orders made by the Collector or any gazetted
subordinate of the Collector, or orders m a d e  on appeal with respect
to such orders, being subject to appeal to, and revision by, superior
revenue-authorities as nearly as may be as the orders made by the
Court, or orders made on appeal with respect to such orders, would
be subject to appeal to, and revision by, appellate or revisional
Courts under this Code or other law for the time being in force if the
decree had not been transferred to the Collector.
1
Substituted  for  the  words  “local  official  Gazette” by  the  Government  of  India  (Adaptation  of  Indian  Laws)  Order,  1937,
published in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary), dated: 1 April 1937, pp. 75-344, Article 3 read with the First Schedule.
2
The words “with the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council” were omitted by the Devolution Act, 1920 (XXXVIII
of 1920), s. 2 read with the First Schedule.
3
Substituted for the words “Local Government” by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, published
in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary), dated: 1 April 1937, pp. 75-344, Article 3 read with the First Schedule.
4
The words “with the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council” were omitted by the Devolution Act, 1920 (XXXVIII
of 1920), s. 2 read with the First Schedule.
5
Substituted  for  the  words  “local  official  Gazette” by  the  Government  of  India  (Adaptation  of  Indian  Laws)  Order,  1937,
published in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary), dated: 1 April 1937, pp. 75-344, Article 3 read with the First Schedule.
6
Substituted for the words “Local Government” by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, published
in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary), dated: 1 April 1937, pp. 75-344, Article 3 read with the First Schedule.
(2) Jurisdiction of Civil Courts barred.– A power conferred by rules
made under sub-section (1) upon the Collector or any gazetted subordinate of
the Collector, or upon any appellate or revisional authority, shall not be
exercisable by the Court or by any Court in exercise of any appellate or
revisional jurisdiction which it has with respect to decrees or orders of the Court.
71. Collector deemed to be acting judicially.– In executing a decree
transferred to the Collector under section 68 the Collector and his subordinates
shall be deemed to be acting judicially.
72. Where Court may authorize Collector to stay public sale of land.–
(1) where in any local area in which no declaration under section 68 is in force
the property attached consists of land or of a share in land, and the Collector
represents to the Court that the public sale of the land or share is
objectionable and that satisfaction of the decree may be made within a
reasonable period by a temporary alienation of the land or share, the Court
may authorize the Collector to provide for such satisfaction in the manner
recommended by him instead of proceeding to a sale of the land or share.
(2) In every such case the provisions of sections 69 to 71 and of any
rules made in pursuance thereof shall apply so far as they are applicable.
DISTRIBUTION OF ASSESTS