[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 72: Punishment  of  person  guilty  of  one  of  several  offences,  the  judgment  stating  that  it  is

doubtful  of  which. In  all  cases in which judgment is given that  a  person is guilty of  one  of  several
offences  specified in the judgment, but that it is doubtful of  which  of these offences he is guilty, the
offender  shall  be  punished  for  the  offence  for  which  the lowest punishment is provided if the same
punishment is not provided for all.
73. Solitary confinement. Whenever any person is convicted of an offence for which under this
Code the Court has power to sentence him to rigorous imprisonment, the Court may, by its sentence,
order  that  the  offender  shall  be  kept in solitary  confinement  for  any  portion  or  portions  of  the
imprisonment to which he is sentenced, not exceeding three months in the whole, according to the
following scale, that is to say
a time not exceeding one month if the term of imprisonment shall not exceed six months :
a time not exceeding two months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed six months and
1
[shall not exceed one] year :
a time not exceeding three months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed one year.
74. Limit  of  solitary  confinement. In  executing  a  sentence  of  solitary  confinement,  such
confinement  shall in no  case  exceed  fourteen  days  at  a  time, with intervals  between  the  period  of
solitary confinement of not less duration than such periods, and when the imprisonment awarded shall
exceed  three  months,  the  solitary  confinement  shall  not  exceed  seven  days in any  one  month  of  the
whole imprisonment awarded, with intervals  between  the  periods  of  solitary  confinement  of  not less
duration than such periods.
1
Subs. by the Indian Penal Code Amdt. Act, 1882 (8 of 1882), s. 5, for “be less than a”.
37