[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 338A: Punishment  for    Isqat-i-haml

punishment as tazir
Whoever causes isqat-i-haml shall be liable to
(a) with  imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  three  years, if
isqat-i-haml is caused with the consent of the woman; or
(b) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, if isqat-
i-haml is caused without the consent of the woman:
Provided that, if as a result of isqat-i-haml, any hurt is caused to the woman or she dies, the convict
shall also be liable to the punishment provided for such hurt or death, as the case may be.
338B. Isqat-i-janin. Whoever causes a woman with child some of whose limbs or organs have
been formed, to miscarry, if such miscarriage is not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the
life of the woman, is said to cause isqat-i-janin.
Explanation. A woman who causes hereself to miscarry is within the meaning of this section.
338C. Punishment for Isqat-i-janin. Whoever causes Isqat-i-janin shall be liable to
(a) one-twentieth of the diyat if the child is born dead;
(b) full diyat if the child is born alive but dies as a result of any act of the offender; and
(c) imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years as ta'zir:
Provided that, if there are more than one child in the womb of the woman, the offender shall be
liable to separate diyat or ta'zir, as the case may be, for every such child:
Provided further that if, as a result of isqat-i-janin, any hurt is caused to the woman or she dies, the
offender shall also be liable to the punishment provided for such hurt or death, as the case may  be.
338D. Confirmation of sentence of death by way of qisas or tazir, etc. A sentence of death
awarded by way of qisas or tazir, or a sentence of qisas awarded for causing hurt, shall not be executed,
unless it is confirmed by the High Court.
338E. Waiver or compounding of offences. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter and
section 345 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (V of 1898), all offences under this Chapter may
be waived or compounded and the provisions of sections 309
1
[,310 and 311] shall, mutatis mutandis,
apply to the waiver or compounding of such offences:
1
Subs. by Act XLIII of 2016, s. 7.
Provided that, where an offence has been waived or compounded, the court may, in its discretion
having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, acquit or award tazir to the offender according
to the nature of the offence
1
[:]
2
[Provided further that where an offence under this Chapter has been committed and the principle
of fasad-fil-arz is attracted, the court having  regard  to the facts and circumstances  of the  case shall
punish an offender with imprisonment or fine as provided for that offence.]
1
[(2) All questions relating to waiver  or compounding of an offence  or awarding of punishment
under  section  310,  whether  before  or  after  the  passing  of  any  sentence,  shall  be  determined  by  trial
court:
Provided that where the sentence of qisas or any other sentence is waived or compounded during
the pendency of an appeal, such questions may be determined by the appellate court.]
338F. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Chapter,
and in respect of matter ancillary or akin thereto, the court shall be guided by the Injunctions of Islam
as laid down in the Holy Quran and Sunnah.