[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 206: Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in

execution. Whoever fraudulently removes, conceals, transfers or delivers to any person any property or any
interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or interest therein from being taken as a forfeiture or
in  satisfaction  of  a fine, under  a  sentence which has been  pronounced,  or which he knows to  be  likely  to  be
pronounced, by a Court of Justice or other competent authority, or from being taken in execution of a decree or
order which has been made, or which he knows to be likely to be made by a Court of Justice in a civil suit, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.
207. Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in execution. Whoever
fraudulently  accepts,  receives  or claims  any property  or any interest therein, knowing that he has no  right or
rightful claim to such property or interest, or practises any deception touching any right to any property or any
interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or interest therein from being taken as a forfeiture or
in  satisfaction  of  a fine, under  a  sentence which has been  pronounced,  or which he knows to  be  likely  to  be
pronounced by a Court of Justice or other competent authority, or from being taken in execution of a decree or
order which has been made, or which he knows to be likely to be made by a Court of Justice in a civil suit,
1
Explanation ins. by the Indian Criminal Law Arndt. Act, 1894 (3 of 1894), s. 7.
2
Subs. by the Central Laws (Statute Reform) Ordinance, 1960 (21 of 1960) s. S and 2nd Sch. (w.e.f. 14th October; 1955), for "the Provinces and
the Capital of the Federation" which had been subs. by A. O., 1949, Arts. 3 (2) and 4, for "British India".
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine, or with both.
208. Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due. Whoever fraudulently causes or suffers a
decree or order to be passed against him at the suit of any person for a sum not due, or for a larger sum
than is due to such person or for any property or interest in property to which such person is not entitled,
or fraudulently causes or suffers a decree or order to be executed against him after it has  been satisfied,
or for anything in respect of which it has been satisfied, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration
A institutes a suit against Z. Z, knowing that A is likely to obtain a decree against him  fraudulently
suffers a judgment to pass against him for a larger amount at the suit of B, who has no just claim against
him, in order that B, either on his own account or for the benefit of Z, may share in the proceeds of any
sale of Z's property  which  may  be  made  under A's decree.  Z  has  committed  an  offence  under  this
section.
209. Dishonestly  making  false  claim  in  Court. Whoever  fraudulently  or dishonestly, or with
intent to injure or annoy any person, makes in a Court of Justice any claim which he knows to be false,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
210. Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due. Whoever fraudulently obtains a decree or
order against any person for a sum not due, or for a larger sum than is due, or for any property or interest
in property to which he is not entitled, or fraudulently causes a decree or order to be executed against
any  person  after it has  been  satisfied  or  for  anything in respect  of  which it has  been  satisfied,  or
fraudulently suffers or permits any such act to be done in his name, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
211. False charge of offence made with intent to injure. Whoever, with intent to cause injury to
any person, institutes or causes to be instituted any criminal proceeding against that person, or falsely
charges any person with having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground
for  such  proceeding  or  charge against that  person,  shall  be  punished with  imprisonment of  either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both;
and if such criminal proceeding be instituted on a false charge of an offence punishable with death,
1
[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment for  seven  years  or  upwards,  shall  be  punishable with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable
to fine.