[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/CrPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CrPC Section 230: Stay of proceedings if prosecution of offence in altered charge require previous sanction

If  the offence stated in the new or altered or added charge is one  for the  prosecution of which previous  sanction
is necessary, the case shall not be proceeded with until such sanction is  obtained, unless sanction  has been
already obtained for a prosecution on the same facts as those on which the new or altered charge is founded.
231. Re-call of witnesses when charge altered. Whenever a charge is altered or added to by the Court
after the commencement of the trial, the prosecutor and the accused shall be allowed to re-call or  re- summon,
and examine with reference to such alteration or addition, any witness who may have been examined, and also
to call any further witness whom the Court may think to be material.
232. Effect of material error.-(1) If any Appellate Court, or the High Court
1
[,or the Court of Session]
in the exercise of its powers of revision or of its powers under Chapter XXVII, is of opinion that any person
convicted of an offence  was misled in his defence by the absence of  a charge or by  an error in the charge, it
shall direct a new trial to be had upon a charge framed in whatever manner it thinks fit.
(2)  If  the  Court  is  of  opinion  that  the  facts  of  the  case  are  such  that  no  valid  charge  could  be  preferred
against the accused in respect of the facts proved, it shall quash the conviction.
Illustration
A is convicted of an offence, under section 196 of the Pakistan  Penal Code,  (XLV of 1860) upon a charge
which omits to state that he knew the evidence, which he corruptly used or attempted to use as true    or genuine,
was false or fabricated. If the Court thinks it probable that A had such knowledge, and that  he was misled in
his defence by the omission from the charge of the statement that he had it, it  shall direct a   new trial upon an
amended charge; but, if it appears probable from the proceedings that A had no such knowledge, it shall quash
the conviction.
Joinder of charges
233. Separate charges for distinct offences. For every distinct offence of which any person is accused
there shall be a separate charge, and every such charge shall be tried separately, except in the cases  mentioned
in sections 234, 235, 236 and 239.
Illustration
A is accused of a theft on one occasion, and of causing grievous hurt on another occasion. A must be
separately charged and separately tried for the theft and causing grievous hurt.
1
Ins. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972) s. 2 and Sch.
Page 110 of 319
234. Three offences of same kind within year may be charged together.-(1) When a person  is
accused of more offences than one of the same kind committed within the space of twelve months from the first
to the last of such offences,
1
[whether in respect of the same person or not], he may be charged with, and
tried at one trial for, any number of them not exceeding three.
(2) Offences are of the same kind when they are punishable with the same amount of punishment under the
same section of the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of 1860) or of any special or local law:
2
[Provided that, for the purpose of this section, an offence punishable under section 379 of the Pakistan
Penal Code (XLV of 1860) shall be deemed to be an offence of the same kind as an offence  punishable  under
section 380 of the said Code, and that an offence punishable under any section of the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV
of  1860),  or  of  any  special  or  local law, shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  offence  of  the  same  kind  as  an attempt  to
commit such offence, when such an attempt is an offence.]
235. Trial for more than one offence.-(1) If, in one series of acts so connected together as to form the
same transaction, more offences than one are committed by the same person, he may be charged with, and tried
at one trial for, every such offence.
(2) Offence falling within two definitions. If the acts alleged constitute an offence falling within two
or more separate definitions of any law in force for the time being by which offences are defined or punished,
the person accused of them may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, each of such offences.
(3) Acts  constituting  one  offence,  but  constituting  when  combined  a  different  offence.  If
several  acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves constitute an offence, constitute when
combined a different offence, the person accused of them may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, the
offence constituted by such acts when combined, and for any offence constituted by any one, or more, of  such
acts.
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall affect the Pakistan Penal Code, (XLV of 1860) section 71.
Illustrations
to sub-section (1)—
(a) A rescues B, a person in lawful custody, and in so doing causes grievous hurt to C, a constable in
whose custody B was. A may be  charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 225  and
333 of the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of 1860).
(b) A commits house-breaking  by  day  with  intent  to commit adultery,  and commits in the  house  so
entered adultery with B's wife. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under
sections 454 and 497 of the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of 1860).
(c) A entices B, the wife of C, away from C, with intent to commit adultery with B,  and  then commits
adultery with her. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 498
and 497 of the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of 1860).
1
Ins. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 62.
2
Proviso ins., ibid.
Page 111 of 319
(d) A has in his possession several seals, knowing them to be counterfeit and intending to use them for
the  purpose  of  committing  several  forgeries  punishable  under  section  466  of  the  Pakistan Penal
Code.  A  may  be  separately  charged  with,  and  convicted  of,  the  possession  of, each seal  under
section 473 of the Pakistan Penal Code.
(e) With intent to cause injury to B, A institutes a criminal proceeding against  him,  knowing that there
is no just or lawful ground for such proceeding; and also falsely accuses B of having committed an
offence,  knowing  that  there is no just or  lawful  ground  for  such  charges.  A  may  be  separately
charged with, and convicted of, two offences under section 211 of the Pakistan Penal Code.
(f) A, with intent to cause injury to B, falsely accuses him of having committed an offence, knowing
that there is no just or lawful ground for such charge. On the trial, A gives false evidence against B,
intending thereby to cause B to be convicted of a capital offence. A may  be  separately charged
with and convicted of, offences under sections 211 and 194 of the Pakistan Penal Code.
(g) A,  with six others, commits the  offences  of rioting, grievous  hurt  and  assaulting  a public servant
endeavouring in the discharge of his duty as such to suppress the riot. A may be separately charged
with, and convicted of, offences under sections 147, 325 and 152 of the Pakistan Pena! Code.
(h) A threatens B, C and D at the same time with injury to their persons with intent to cause alarm to
them. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, each of the three offences under section
506 of the Pakistan Penal Code.
The separate charges referred to in Illustrations (a) to (h) respectively may be tried at the same
time.
to sub-section (2)
(i) A wrongfully strikes B with a cane. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of,
offences under sections 352 and 323 of the Pakistan Penal Code.
(j) Several stolen sacks of corn are made over to A and B, who know they are  stolen property, for  the
purpose of concealing them. A and B thereupon voluntarily assist each other to conceal the sacks
at the bottom of a grain pit. A and B may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences
under sections 411 and 414 of the Pakistan Penal Code.
(k) A exposes her child with the knowledge that she is thereby likely to cause  its death. The  child  dies
in consequence  of  such  exposure.  A  may  be  separately  charged  with,  and  convicted  of,  offences
under sections 317 and 304 of the Pakistan Penal Code.
(l) A dishonestly uses a forged document as genuine evidence, in order to convict B,  a  public servant,
of an offence under section 167 of the Pakistan Penal Code. A may be  separately charged with,
and convicted of, offences under sections 471 (read with 466)  and 196 of  the  same Code.
Page 112 of 319
to sub-section (3)
(m) A commits robbery  on  B,  and in doing  so  voluntarily  causes  hurt  to him. A  may  be  separately
charged  with,  and  convicted  of,  offences  under  sections  323,  392  and  394  of  the  Pakistan Penal
Code.
236. Where it is doubtful  what offence  has been committed. If a single  act or series of acts is of
such  a nature that it is doubtful which of several offences the facts which can be proved will  constitute,  the
accused may be charged with having committed all or any of such offences, and any number of such charges
may be tried at once; or he may be charged in the  alternative  with  having  committed some one  of  the  said
offences.
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of an act which may amount  to theft, or receiving stolen property, or criminal  breach
of  trust  or  cheating.  He  may  be  charged  with  theft,  receiving  stolen  property,  criminal  breach  of
trust and cheating, or he may be charged with having committed theft, or receiving stolen property,
or criminal breach of trust or cheating.
(b) A states on oath before the Magistrate that he saw B hit C with a club. Before the Sessions Court A
states on oath that B never hit C. A may be charged in the alternative and convicted of intentionally
giving false  evidence,  although it cannot  be  proved  which  of  these  contradictory  statements  was
false.
237. When a person is charged with one offence, he can be convicted of another.-(1) If, in the
case  mentioned in section  236,  the  accused is charged  with  one  offence,  and it appears in evidence  that  he
committed a different offence for which he might have been charged under the provisions of that section, he
may be convicted of the offence which he is shown to have committed, although he was not charged with it.
1
* * * * * *
Illustration
A  is  charged  with  theft.  It  appears  that  he  committed  the  offence  of  criminal  breach  of  trust,  or  that  of
receiving stolen goods. He may be convicted of  criminal breach of trust  or of receiving stolen goods (as the
case may be) though he was not charged with such offence.
238. When  offence  proved  included  in  offence  charged.-(1)  When  a  person is charged  with  an
offence consisting of several particulars, a combination of some only of which constitutes, a  complete  minor
offence, and such combination is proved, that the remaining particulars are not proved, he may be convicted of
the minor offence, though he was not charged with it.
(2) When a person is charged with an offence and facts are proved which reduce it  to a  minor  offence, he
may be convicted of the minor offence, although he is not charged with it.
1
Sub-section (2) rep. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 63.
Page 113 of 319
1
[(2A) When a person is charged with an offence, he may be convicted of an attempt to commit such
offence although the attempt is not separately charged.]
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorize a conviction of any offence referred  to  in
section 198 or section 199 when no complaint has been made as required by that section.
Illustrations
(a) A is charged, under section 407 of the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of 1860), with criminal breach of
trust in respect of property entrusted to him as a carrier. It appears, that  he  did  commit criminal
breach of trust under section 406 in respect of the property, but that it was not entrusted to him as a
carrier. He may be convicted of criminal breach of trust under section 406.
(b) A is charged, under section 325 of the Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of 1860), with  causing grievous
hurt. He proves that he acted on grave and sudden provocation. He may be convicted under section
335 of that Code.
2
[239.  What  persons  may  be  charged  jointly.  The  following  persons  may  be  charged  and
tried together, namely:
(a) persons accused of the same offence committed in the course of the same transaction;
(b) persons accused of an offence  and persons accused of abetment, or of an attempt to commit  such
offence;
(c) persons  accused  of  more  than  one  offence  of  the  same  kind, within the  meaning  of  section  234
committed by them jointly within the period of twelve months;
(d) persons accused of different offences committed in the course of the same transaction;
(e) persons  accused  of  an  offence  which  includes  theft,  extortion,  or  criminal  misappropriation,  and
persons accused of receiving or retaining, or assisting in the disposal or concealment of, property
possession  of  which is alleged to  have  been  transferred  by  any  such  offence  committed  by  the
first-named persons, or of abetment of or attempting to commit any such last­named offence;
(f) persons accused of offences under sections 411 and 414 of the Pakistan Penal Code  (XLV of 1860)
or either of those sections in respect of stolen property the possession of which has been transferred
by one offence; and
(g) persons  accused  of  any  offence  under  Chapter  XIl  of  the  Pakistan Penal Code (XLV of  1860)
relating to counterfeit coin, and persons accused of any other offence under the said
1
Sub-section (2A) ins. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amdt.) Act, 1923 (18 of 1923), s. 64.
2
Subs. ibid., s. 65, for original s. 239.
Page 114 of 319
Chapter relating to the same coin, or of abetment of or attempting to commit any such offence;
and the provisions contained in the former part of this Chapter shall, so far as may be, apply to all such
charges.]
240. Withdrawal of remaining charges on conviction on one of several charges. When a charge
containing more heads than one is framed against the same person, and when a conviction has been had on one
or  more  of  them,  the  complainant,  or  the  officer  conducting  the  prosecution, may,  with  the   consent    of  the
Court, withdraw the remaining charge or charges, or the Court of its own accord may stay the inquiry  into, or
trial of, such charge or charges. Such withdrawal shall have the effect of an acquittal on such charge or charges,
unless the conviction be set aside, in which case the  said Court  (subject  to the  order of the  Court setting aside
the conviction) may proceed with the inquiry into or trial of the charge or charges so withdrawn.
CHAPTER XX
OF THE TRIAL OF
1
[CASES] BY MAGISTRATES
241.
2
[Procedure  in trial  of cases]. The  following procedure  shall be  observed by Magistrates in
the trial of
1
[cases.]
3
[241A.  Supply  of  statements  and  documents  to  the    accused.-(1) In all cases instituted upon
police report, except those tried summarily or punishable with fine or imprisonment not exceeding six months,
copies  of  statements  of  all  witnesses  recorded  under  sections  161  and  164  and  of  the  inspection   note
recorded by an investigation officer on his first visit  to the  place  of occurrence, shall be  supplied free of cost
to the accused not less than seven days before the commencement of the trial:
Provided  that, if any  part  of  the  statement  recorded  under  section  161 is such  that  its  disclosure  to  the
accused would be inexpedient in the public interest, such part of the statement shall be excluded from the  copy
of the statement furnished to the accused.
(2) In all cases instituted upon a complaint in writing, the complainant shall,
(a) state in the petition of complaint the substance of the accusation, the names of his witnesses and the
gist of the evidence which he is likely to adduce at the trial; and
(b) within three days of the order of the Court under section 204 for issue of process to the accused, file
in the Court for supply to the accused, as many copies of the complaint and any other document
which he has filed with his complaint as the number of the accused:
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s.2 and Sch. for “summons  cases”.
For enforcement of this amendment in the Provinces, see, para 2 of foot ntoe 3 on p. 40, supra.
2
Subs. ibid., for “Procedure in summons cases”.
3
Ins. ibid.
Page 115 of 319
Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply in any case in which the complaint has been
made by a Court or by a public servant acting or purporting to act in the  discharge  of his official  duties].
1
[242. Charge to be framed. When the accused appears or is brought before the Magistrate, a formal
charge shall be framed relating to the offence of which he is accused and he shall be  asked whether he  admits
that he has committed the offence with which he is charged.].
243. Conviction on admission of truth of accusation. If the accused admits that he has committed
the offence
2
[with which he is charged], his admission shall be recorded as nearly as possible in the words
used  by him; and, if he shows no sufficient cause why he should not be convicted, the Magistrate
3
[may
convict] him accordingly.