[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://na.gov.pk/uploads/documents/6926e060076ed_467.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

Constitution Section 222: Subject to the Constitution,

6
[Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)]
may by law provide for—
(a)    the allocation of seats in the National Assembly as
required by clauses (3) and (4) of Article 51;
(b)    the delimitation of constituencies by the Election
Commission
10
[including delimitation of constituencies
of local governments];
(c)    the preparation of electoral rolls, the requirements as
to residence in a constituency, the determination of
objections pertaining to and the commencement of
electoral rolls;
Executive
authorities to
assist Com-
mission, etc.
Officers and
5
[staff].
Electoral laws.
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Subs.by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 81,for the full-stop.
2
New paragraphs (d) and (e) added ibid.
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Twentieth Amdt.) Act, 2012 (5 of 2012), s. 7, for the full-stop.
4
Proviso ins. ibid.
5
Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-Second Amdt.) Act, 2016 (25 of 2016), s.10, for “servants”.
6
See footnote 9 on page 5, supra.
7
Subs. by the Act No. 10 of 2010, s. 82, for “Commissioner”.
8
Subs by the Act No. 25 of 2016, s. 10, for “Election Commission”.
9
The words “Commissioner or an” omitted by the Act No. 10 of 2010, s. 82.
10
Added by the Act No. 25 of 2016, s. 11.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN                      135
(d)    the conduct of elections and election petitions the
decision of doubts and disputes arising in connection
with elections;
(e)    matters relating to corrupt practices and other offences
in connection with elections; and
(f)    all other matters necessary for the due constitution of
the two Houses
1
[,]
2
* the Provincial Assemblies
3
[and
local governments];
but no such law shall have the effect of taking away or abridging
any of the powers of the Commissioner or
4
[the] Election
Commission under this Part.
223.(1) No person shall, at the same time, be a member of—
(a)    both Houses; or
(b)    a House and a Provincial Assembly; or
(c)    the Assemblies of two or more Provinces; or
(d)    a House or a Provincial Assembly in respect of more
than one seat.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent a person from being
a candidate for two or more seats at the same time, whether in the
same body or in different bodies, but if he is elected to more than
one seat he shall, within a period of thirty days after the
declaration of the result for the last such seat, resign all but one
of his seats, and if he does not so resign, all the seats to which he
has been elected shall become vacant at the expiration of the said
period of thirty days except the seat to which he has been elected
last or, if he has been elected to more than one seat on the same
day, the seat for election to which his nomination was filed last.
Explanation.—In this clause, “body” means either House or
a Provincial Assembly.
(3) A person to whom clause (2) applies shall not take a seat
in either House or the Provincial Assembly to which he has been
elected until he has resigned all but one of his seats.
Bar against
double
membership.
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-Second Amdt.) Act, 2016 (25 of 2016), s. 11.
2
The word “and” omittedibid.
3
Added ibid.
4
Subs. ibid.,for the word “an”.
136                      CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
(4) Subject to clause (2) if a member of either House  or of
a Provincial Assembly becomes a candidate for a second seat
which,   in   accordance   with   clause   (1),   he   may   not   hold
concurrently with his first seat, then his first seat shall become
vacant as soon as he is elected to the second seat.
224.
1
[(1) A general election to the National Assembly or a
Provincial Assembly shall be held within a period of sixty days
immediately following the day on which the term of the
Assembly is due to expire, unless the Assembly has been sooner
dissolved, and the results of the election shall be declared not
later than fourteen days before that day.]
2
[(1A) On dissolution of the Assembly on completion of its
term, or in case it is dissolved under Article 58 or Article 112, the
President, or the Governor, as the case may be, shall appoint a
care-taker Cabinet:
Provided that the care-taker Prime Minister shall be
3
[appointed] by the President in consultation with the Prime
Minister and the Leader of the Opposition in the outgoing
National Assembly, and a care-taker Chief Minister shall be
appointed by the Governor in consultation with the Chief
Minister and the Leader of the Opposition in  the outgoing
Provincial Assembly:
4
[Provided further that if the Prime Minister or a Chief
Minister and their respective Leader of the Opposition do not
agree on any person to be appointed as a care-taker Prime
Minister or the care-taker Chief Minister, as the case may be, the
provisions of Article 224A shall be followed:]
Provided
5
[also] that the Members of the Federal and
Provincial care-taker Cabinets shall be appointed on the advice of
the care-taker Prime Minister or the care-taker Chief Minister, as
the case may be.
(1B) Members of the care-taker Cabinets including the
care-taker Prime Minister and the care-taker Chief Minister and
their immediate family members shall not be eligible to contest
the immediately following elections to such Assemblies.
Explanation.—In this clause “immediate family members”
means spouse and children.]
Time of
Election and
bye-election.
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 83, for
“clause (1)”.
2
New clauses (1A), (1B) and Explanation ins. ibid.
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Twentieth Amdt.) Act, 2012 (5 of 2012), s. 8, for “selected”.
4
New proviso ins. ibid.
5
Subs. ibid.,for “further”.
CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN                      137
(2)    When   the   National   Assembly   or   a   Provincial
Assembly is dissolved, a general election to the Assembly shall
be held within a period of ninety days after the dissolution, and
the results of the election shall be declared not later than fourteen
days after the conclusion of the polls.
(3)    An election to fill the seats in the Senate which are to
become vacant on the expiration of the term of the members of
the Senate shall be held not earlier than thirty days immediately
preceding the day on which the vacancies are due to occur.
(4)    When, except by dissolution of the National Assembly
or a Provincial Assembly, a
1
* seat in any such Assembly
has become vacant not later than one hundred and twenty days
before the term of that Assembly is due to expire, an election to
fill the seat shall be held within sixty days from the occurrence of
the vacancy.
(5)    When a seat in the Senate has become vacant, an
election to fill the seat shall be held within thirty days from the
occurrence of the vacancy.
2
[(6) When a seat reserved for women or non-Muslims in
the National Assembly or a Provincial Assembly falls vacant, on
account of death, resignation or disqualification of a member, it
shall be filled by the next person in order of precedence from the
party list of the candidates to be submitted to the Election
Commission by the political party whose member has vacated
such seat
3
[:]]
4
[Provided that if at any time the party list is exhausted, the
concerned political party may submit a name for any vacancy
which may occur thereafter.]
5
*     *     *     *     *     *     *
6
[224A.(1) In case the Prime Minister and the Leader of the
Opposition in the outgoing National Assembly do not agree on
any person to be appointed as the care-taker Prime Minister,
within three days of the dissolution of the National Assembly,
they shall forward two nominees each to a Committee to be
Resolution by
Committee or
Election
Commission.
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
1
The word “general” omitted by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010
(10 of 2010), s. 2.
2
New clause (6) ins. and shall be deemed always to have been so ins. with effect from
the 21st day of August 2002ibid., s. 83.
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Twentieth Amdt.) Act, 2012 (5 of 2012), s. 8,  for the full-
stop.
4
Proviso added ibid.
5
Clause (7) stands omitted as a consequence (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of
2010), see section 2.
6
New Article 224A ins. by the Act No. 5 of 2012, s. 9.
138                      CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN
immediately   constituted   by   the   Speaker   of   the   National
Assembly, comprising eight members of the outgoing National
Assembly, or the Senate, or both, having equal representation
from the Treasury and the Opposition, to be nominated by the
Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition respectively.
(2)    In case a Chief Minister and the Leader of the
Opposition in the outgoing Provincial Assembly do not agree on
any person to be appointed as the care-taker Chief Minister,
within three days of the dissolution of that Assembly, they shall
forward two nominees each to a Committee to be immediately
constituted   by   the   Speaker   of   the   Provincial   Assembly,
comprising six members of the outgoing Provincial Assembly
having   equal   representation   from   the   Treasury   and   the
Opposition, to be nominated by the Chief Minister and the
Leader of the Opposition respectively.
(3)    The Committee constituted under clause (1) or (2)
shall finalize the name of the care-taker Prime Minister or
care-taker Chief Minister, as the case may be, within three days
of the referral of the matter to it:
Provided that in case of inability of the Committee to decide
the matter in the aforesaid period, the names of the nominees
shall be referred to the Election Commission of Pakistan for final
decision within two days.
(4)    The incumbent Prime Minister and the incumbent
Chief Minister shall continue to hold office till appointment of
the care-taker Prime Minister and the care-taker Chief Minister,
as the case may be.
(5)    Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (1) and
(2), if the members of the Opposition are less than five in the
Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) and less than four in any Provincial
Assembly, then all of them shall be members of the Committee
mentioned in the aforesaid clauses and the Committee shall be
deemed to be duly constituted.]