[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 201: Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to screen

offender--if a capital offence. Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has
been committed, causes any evidence of the commission of that offence to disappear, with the intention
of  screening  the  offender  from  legal  punishment,  or  with  that  intention  gives  any  information
respecting the offence which he knows or believes to be false,
shall, if the offence which he knows or believes to have been committed is punishable with death,
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and
shall also be liable to fine ;
if punishable with
1
[imprisonment for life] ; and if the offence is punishable with
2
[imprisonment
for life], or with imprisonment which may extend to ten years shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine ;
if  punishable  with  less  than  ten  years  imprisonment. and  if  the  offence  is  punishable  with
imprisonment  for  any  term  not  extending  to  ten  years, shall  be  punished  with  imprisonment  of  the
description  provided  for  the  offence,  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  one-fourth  part  of  the  longest
term of the imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration
A, knowing that B has murdered Z, assists B to hide the body with the intention of screening B
from punishment. A is liable to imprisonment of either description for seven years, and also to fine.
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “Transportation”.
2
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
202. Intentional omission to give information of offence by person bound to inform. Whoever,
knowing or having reason  to  believe that an offence  has been committed, intentionally  omits to give any in-
formation respecting that offence which he is legally bound to give, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
203. Giving  false  information  respecting  an  offence  committed. Whoever, knowing or having
reason  to  believe that an offence  has been committed,  gives  any information respecting that offence which he
knows or believes to be false, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
1
[Explanation. In sections 201 and 202 and in this section the word "offence" includes any act
committed at any place out of
2
[Pakistan], which, if committed in
2
[Pakistan], would be punishable under any of
the following sections, namely, 302, 304, 382, 392, 393, 394 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449,
450, 457, 458, 459, and 460.]
204. Destruction of document to prevent its production as evidence. Whoever secretes or destroys
any  document which he may be lawfully compelled  to  produce  as  evidence  in  a  Court  of  Justice,  or  in any
proceeding lawfully held before a public servant, as such, or obliterates or renders illegible the whole or any part
of such document with the intention of preventing the same from being produced or used as evidence before such
Court or public servant as aforesaid, or after he shall have been lawfully summoned or required to produce the
same for that purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both.
205. False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit or prosecution. Whoever falsely
personates another, and in such assumed character makes any admission or statement, or confesses judgment, or
causes any process  to  be  issued  or  becomes  bail  or  security,  or  does any  other act  in any suit  or criminal
prosecution,  shall  be punished with imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term which may  extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both.