[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://khalidzafar.com/wp-content/files_mf/1527158791QanuneShahadatOrder1984.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-14

QSO Section 37: Confession caused by inducement, threat or promise, when irrelevant in criminal

proceedings. A confession made by an accused person is irrelevant in a criminal proceeding, if
the making of the confession appears to the Court to have been caused by any inducement,
threat or promise having reference to the charge against the accused person, proceeding from
a person in authority and sufficient, in the opinion of the Court, to give the accused person
grounds which would appear to him reasonable for supporting that by making it he would gain
any advantage or avoid and evil of a temporal nature in reference to the proceedings against
him.
COMMENTARY
Confessional Statement. Omission by recording Magistrate to ask question whether confessional
statement was made under promise by Police, would not affect evidentiary value of
confessional statement when accused did not say in their statement u/s. 342 and u/s. 340(2),
Cr.P.C. that their confessional statement was made under promise.2
Extra-judicial confession. Extra-judicial confession was weakest type of evidence which required
that before it was relied upon, it must be supported by some independent circumstantial
evidence coming from an unimpeachable source.3
38. Confession to police officer not to be proved. No confession made to a police officer shall be
proved as against a person accused of any offence.
COMMENTARY
Confession by accused before Police would inadmissible in evidence under Art. 38.3a
39. Confession by accused while in custody of police not to be proved against him. Subject to
Article 40, no confession made by any person whilst he is in the custody of a police-officer,
unless it be made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate, shall be proved as against such
person.
Explanation. In this Article, ―Magistrate‖ does not include the head of a village discharging
magisterial functions unless such headman is a Magistrate exercising the powers of a Magistrate
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898).
COMMENTARY
Mere pointing out the place to police as being the place where children had been thrown by
accused but such pointing out did not lead to discovery of any fact. Held: For purpose of Art.
40, this evidence cannot be relied upon as corroboratory evidence.4
Confession. Retracted confession. Constitution of Pakistan, 1973, Art. 185 (3). Leave to appeal
was granted to consider the contentions of accused that if the Courts below would have
considered the retracted confession as a whole, the accused would not have been awarded the
death penalty and that the confession was retracted, and, therefore, in order to convict the
accused there should have been corroboration and further that the confession should have
been read as whole and reliance should not have been placed merely on the inculpating part
and ignoring the other portion.5
40. How much of information received from accused may be proved. When any fact is deposed
to as discovered in consequence of information received form a person accused of any offence,
in the custody of a police-officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts to a
confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved.
COMMENTARY
Recovery made on pointation of accused is relevant under Art. 40.6
Place of occurrence. Discovery. Place of occurrence known to everyone and site plan having
been prepared prior to the pointation of the same by the accused, such pointation could not be
treated as a discovery to bring it within the four corners of Art. 40 of Qanun-e-Shahadat,
1984.7