[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/wp-content/uploads/2026/01/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT-ORDER1984-Amendment-up-to-date-2025.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

QSO Section 25: In suits for damages facts tending to enable Court to determine amount are

relevant. —In suits in which damages are claimed, any fact which will enable the court to determine
the amount of damages which ought to be awarded, is relevant.
26. Facts relevant when right or custom is in question. — Where the question is as to
the existence of any right or custom, the following facts are relevant: —
(a) any transaction by which the right or custom in question was created, claimed,
modified,  recognized, asserted  or denied, or which  was  inconsistent with its
existence;
(b) particular instances in which the right or custom was claimed, recognized or
exercised, or in which its exercise was disputed, asserted or departed from.
Illustrations
The question is whether A has a right to a fishery. A deed conferring the fishery on A’s
ancestors, a mortgage of the fishery by A’s father, a subsequent grant of the fishery by A’s father,
irreconcilable with mortgage, particular instances in which A’s father exercised the right, or in which
the exercise of the right was stopped by A’s neighbours, are relevant facts.
27. Facts showing existence of state of mind, or of body, or bodily feeling.— Facts
showing  the  existence  of  any  state  of  mind,  such  as  intention,  knowledge,  good  faith,  negligence,
rashness, ill-will or good-will towards any particular person, or showing the existence of any state of
body or bodily feeling, are relevant, when  the existence of any such state  of mind or body or bodily
feeling is in issue or relevant.
Explanation 1. — A fact relevant as showing the existence of a relevant state of mind must
show that the state of mind exists, not generally, but in reference to the particular matter in question.
Page 21 of
59
Explanation 2. — But where, upon the trial of a person accused of an offence, the previous
commission by the accused of an offence is relevant within the meaning of this Article, the previous
conviction of such person shall also be a relevant fact.
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen. It is proved that he
was in possession of a particular stolen article.
The fact that, at the same time, he was in possession of many other stolen articles is
relevant, as tending to show that he knows each and all of the articles of which he was
in possession to be stolen.
(b) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to another person a counterfeit coin which, at
the time when he delivered it, he knew to be counterfeit.
The fact that, at the time of its delivery, A was possessed of a number of other pieces
of counterfeit coin is relevant.
The  fact  that  A  had  been  previously  convicted  of  delivering  to  another  person  as
genuine a counterfeit coin knowing it to be counterfeit is relevant.
(c) A sues B for damage done by a dog of B’s which B knew to be ferocious.
The  facts  that  the  dog  had  previously  bitten  X,  Y  and  Z,  and  that  they  had  made
complaints to B, are relevant.
(d) The question is whether A, the acceptor of a bill of exchange, knew that the name of
the payee was fictitious.
The fact that A had accepted other bills drawn in the same manner before they could
have  been  transmitted  to  him  by  the  payee  if  the  payee  had  been  a  real  person,  is
relevant as showing that A knew that the payee was a fictitious person.
(e) A is accused of defaming B by publishing an imputation intended to harm the
reputation of B.
The fact of previous publications by A respecting B, showing ill-will on the part of A
towards B is relevant, as proving A’s intention to harm B’s reputation by the particular
publication in question.
The facts that there was no previous quarrel between A and B, and that A repeated the
matter complained of as he heard it, are relevant, as showing that A did not intend to
harm the reputation of B.
(f) A is sued by B for fraudulently representing to B that C was solvent whereby B, being
induced to trust C, who was insolvent, suffered loss.
The fact that at the time when A represented C to be solvent, C was supposed to be
solvent by his neighbors’ and by persons dealing with him, is relevant, as showing that
A made the representation in good faith.
(g) A is sued by B for the price of work done by B, upon a house of which A is owner, by
Page 22 of
59
the order of C, a contractor.
A’s defence is that B’s contract was with C.
The fact that A paid C for the work in question is relevant, as proving that A did, in
good faith, make over to C the management of the work in question, so that C was in
a position to contract with B on C’s own account, and not as agent for A.
(h) A is accused of the dishonest misappropriation of property which he had found, and
the  question  is  whether,  when  he  appropriated  it,  he  believed  in  good  faith  that  the
real owner could not be found.
The fact that public notice of the loss of the property had been given in the place where
A was, is relevant, as showing that A did not in good faith believe that the real owner
of the property could not be found.
The fact that A knew, or had reason to believe, that the notice was given fraudulently
by C, who had heard of the loss of the property and wished to set up a false claim to
it, is relevant, as showing that the fact that A knew of the notice did not disprove A’s
good faith.
(i) A is charged with shooting at B with intent to kill him. In order to show A’s intent, the
fact of A’s having previously shot at B may be proved.
(j) A is charged with sending threatening letters to B. Threatening letters previously sent
by A to B may be proved, as showing the intention of the letters.
(k) The question is, whether A has been guilty of cruelty towards B, his wife.
Expressions  of  their  feeling  towards  each  other  shortly  before  or  after  the  alleged
cruelty are relevant facts.
(l) The question is whether A’s death was caused by poison. Statements made by “A”
during his illness as to his symptoms are relevant facts.
(m) The question is, what was the state of A’s health at the time an assurance on his life
was affected.
Statements made by A as to the state of his health at or near the time in question are
relevant facts.
(n) A sues B for negligence in providing him with a carriage for hire not reasonably fit
for use, whereby A was injured.
The fact that B’s attention was drawn on other occasions to the defect of that particular
carriage is relevant.
The  fact  that  B  was  habitually  negligent about  the  carriages  which  he  let  to  hire  is
irrelevant.
(o) A is tried for the murder of B by intentionally shooting him dead.
The  fact  that  A on  other  occasions  shot  at  B  is  relevant as showing  his  intention  to
Page 23 of
59
shoot B.
The  fact  that A was in the habit of shooting at people  with Intent to murder them  is
irrelevant.
(p) A is tried for a crime.
The fact that he said something indicating an intention to commit that particular crime
is relevant.
The fact that he said something indicating a general disposition to commit crimes of
that class is irrelevant.
28. Facts bearing on question whether act was accidental or intentional. — When
there is a question whether on act was accidental or intentional, or done with a particular knowledge or
intention, the fact that such act formed part of a series of similar occurrence, in each of which the person
doing the act was concerned, is relevant.
Illustrations
(a) A  is  accused  of  burning  down  his  house  in  order  to  obtain  money  for  which  it  is
insured.
The facts that A lived in several houses successively each of which he insured, in each
of  which  a  fire  occurred,  and  after  each  of  which  fires  A  received  payment  from
different  insurance  officers,  are  relevant,  as  tending  to  show  that  the  fires  were  not
accidental.
(b) A is employed to receive money from the debtors of B. It is A’s duty to make entries in
a book showing the amounts received by him. He makes an entry showing that on a
particular occasion he received less than he really did receive.
The question is whether this false entry was accidental or intentional.
The facts that other entries made by A in the some book are false, and that the false
entry is in each case in favour of A, are relevant.
(c) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to B a counterfeit rupee.
The question is, whether the delivery of the rupee was accidental.
The  facts  that,  soon  before  or  soon  after  the  delivery  to  B,  A  delivered  counterfeit
rupees to C, D and E are relevant as showing that the delivery to B was not accidental.
29. Existence of course of business when relevant. — When there is a question whether
a particular act was done, the existence of any course of business, according to which it naturally would
have been done, is a relevant fact.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether a particular letter was dispatched.
The fact that it was the ordinary course of business for all letters put in a certain place
Page 24 of
59
to be carried to the post, and that particular letter was put in that place are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether a particular letter reached A.
The facts that it was posted in due course, and was not returned through the Dead
Letter Office, are relevant.
ADMISSIONS
30. Admission defined. — An  admission  is  a  statement,  oral  or  documentary,  which
suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or relevant fact, and which is made by any of the persons,
and under the circumstances, hereinafter mentioned
1 2
[:]
2
[Explanation. — Statements generated by automated information system may be attributed
to the person exercising power or control over the said information system.]
31. Admission by party to proceeding or his agent, etc.— (1) Statements made by a
party  to  the  proceeding,  or  by  an  agent  to  any  such  party,  whom  the  Court  regards,  under  the
circumstances of the case, as expressly or impliedly authorized by him to make them, are admissions.
(2) Statements  made  by  parties  to  suits  suing  or  sued  in  a  representative  character,  are  not
admissions, unless they were made while the party making them held that character.
(3) Statements made by __
(a) persons who have any proprietary or pecuniary interest in the subject-matter
of the proceeding, and who make the statement in their character of persons so
interested, or
(b) persons from whom the parties to the suit have derived their interest in the
subject-matter of the suit,
are admissions if they are made during the continuance of the interest of the
persons making the statements.