[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 89: Act done in good faith for benefit of child or insane person, by or by consent of guardian

Nothing which is done in good faith for the benefit of a person under twelve years of age, or of unsound
mind, by or by consent, either express or implied, of the guardian or other person having lawful charge
of that person, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to
cause or be known by the doer to be likely to cause to that person:
Provisos. Provided—
First. That this exception shall not extend to the intentional causing of death, or to the
attempting to cause death ;
Secondly. That this exception shall not extend to the doing of anything which the person doing it
knows to be likely to cause death, for any purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt;
or the curing of any grievous disease or infirmity ;
Thirdly. That this exception shall not extend to the voluntary causing of grievous hurt, or to the
attempting to cause grievous hurt, unless it be for the purpose of preventing death or grievous hurt, or
the curing of any grievous disease or infirmity ;
Fourthly. That this exception shall not extend to the abetment of any offence, to the committing
of which offence it would not extend.
Illustration
A, in good faith, for his child’s benefit without his child’s consent, has his child cut for the stone by
a surgeon, knowing it to be likely that the operation will cause the child’s death, but not intending to
cause the child’s death. A is within the exception, inasmuch as his object was the cure of the child.
90. Consent known to be given under fear or misconception. A consent is not such a consent as
is intended by any section of this Code, if the consent is given by a person under fear of injury, or under
a misconception of fact, and if the person doing the act knows, or has reason to believe, that the consent
was given in consequence of such fear or misconception ; or
Consent of insane person. if the consent is given by a person who, from unsoundness of mind, or
intoxication,is unable to understand the nature and consequence of that to which he gives his consent
; or
Consent of child. unless the contrary appears from the context, if the consent is given by a person
who is under twelve years of age.
91. Exclusion  of  acts  which  are  offences  independently  of  harm  caused. The exceptions in
sections 87, 88 and 89 do not extend to acts which are offences independently of any harm which they
may cause, or be intended to cause, or be known to be likely to cause, to the person giving the consent,
or on whose behalf the consent is given.
41
Illustration
Causing miscarriage (unless caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the woman)
is an offence  independently of any harm which it may cause or be intended to cause to the woman.
Therefore, it is not an offence “by reason of such harm” , and the consent of the woman or of her
guardian to the causing of such miscarriage does not justify the act.
92. Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent. Nothing is an offence by
reason  of  any  harm  which it may  cause  to  a  person  for  whose  benefit it is done in good faith,  even
without that person's consent, if the circumstances are such that it is impossible for that person to signify
consent, or if that person is incapable of giving consent, and has no guardian or other person in lawful
charge of him from whom it is possible to obtain consent in time for the thing to be done with benefit:
Proviso. Provided—
First. That this exception shall not extend to the intentional causing of death, or the attempting
to cause death;
Secondly.
That this exception shall not extend to the doing of anything which the person doing
it knows to  be likely to cause death,  for any  purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous
hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or infirmity ;
Thirdly. That this exception shall not extend to the voluntary causing of hurt, or to the
attempting to cause hurt, for any purpose other than the preventing of death or hurt ;
Fourthly. That this exception shall not extend to the abetment of any offence, to the
committing of which offence, it would not extend.
Illustrations
(a) Z is thrown  from his horse,  and is insensible. A,  a surgeon, finds  that  Z  requires  to  be
trepanned. A not intending Z’s death but in good faith for Z’s benefit, performs the trepan
before Z recovers his power of judging for himself. A has committed no offence.
(b) Z is carried off by a tiger. A fires at the tiger knowing it to be likely that the shot may kill Z,
but not intending to kill Z, and in good faith intending Z’s benefit. A’s ball gives Z a mortal
wound. A has committed no offence.
(c) A, a surgeon, sees a child suffer an accident which is likely to prove fatal unless an operation
be immediately performed. There is not time to apply to the child’s guardian. A performs
the operation inspite of the entreaties of the child, intending in good faith, the child's benefit.
A has committed no offence.
(d) A is in a house which is on fire, with Z, a child. People below hold out a blanket. A drops
the child from the housetop, knowing it to be likely that the fall may kill the child, but not
intending to kill the child, and intending, in good faith, the child’s benefit. Here even if the
child is killed by the fall, A has committed no offence.
92.
Explanation. Mere pecuniary benefit is not benefit within the meaning of sections 88, 89 and
93. Communication made in good faith. No communication made in good faith is an offence by
reason of any harm to the person to whom it is made, if it is made for the benefit of that person.
Illustration
A, a surgeon, in good faith, communicates to a patient his opinion that he cannot live. The patient
dies in consequence of the shock. A has committed no offence, though he knew it to be likely that the
communication might cause the patient’s death.
94. Act to which a person is compelled by threats. Except murder, and offences against the State
punishable with death, nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is compelled to do it by
threats,  which,  at  the time of  doing  it,  reasonably  cause  the  apprehension  that  instant  death  to  that
person will otherwise be the consequence : Provided the person doing the act did not of his own accord,
or  from  a  reasonable  apprehension  of  harm  to himself short  of  instant  death,  place himself  in the
situation by which he became subject to such constraint.
Explanation 1. A person who, of his own accord, or by reason of a threat of being beaten, joins
a gang of dacoits, knowing their character, is not entitled to the benefit of this exception, on the ground
of his having been compelled by his associates to do anything that is an offence by law.
Explanation 2. A person seized by a gang of dacoits, and forced by threat of instant death, to
do a thing which is an offence by law ; for example, a smith compelled to take his tools and to force
the door of a house for the dacoits to enter and plunder it, is entitled to the benefit of this exception.
95. Act causing slight harm. Nothing is an offence by reason that it causes, or that it is intended
to cause, or that it is known to be likely to cause, any harm, if that harm is so slight that no person of
ordinary sense and temper would complain of such harm.
Of the Right of Private Defence
96. Things done in private defence. Nothing is an offence which is done in the exercise of the
right of private defence.
97. Right of private defence of the body and of property. Every person has a right, subject to
the restrictions contained in section 99, to defend
First.
body ;
His own body, and the body of any other person, against any offence affecting the huma
Secondly. The property, whether moveable or immoveable, of himself or of any other person,
against any act which is an offence falling under the definition of theft, robbery, mischief or criminal
trespass, or which is an attempt to commit theft, robbery, mischief or criminal trespass.
98. Right of private defence against the act of a person of unsound mind, etc. When an act,
which would otherwise  be  a  certain  offence is not  that  offence,  by  reason  of  the  youth,  the  want  of
maturity of understanding, the unsoundness of mind or the intoxication of the person doing that act, or
by reason of any misconception on the part of that person, every person has the same right of private
defence against that act which he would have if the act were that offence.
Illustrations
(a) Z, under the influence of madness, attempts to kill A ; Z is guilty of no offence. But A has
the same right of private defence which he would have if Z were sane.
(b) A enters by night a house which he is legally entitled to enter. Z, in good faith, taking A for
a house-breaker, attacks A. Here Z, by attacking A under this misconception, commits no
offence. But A has the same right of private defence against Z, which he would have if Z
were not acting under that misconception.
99. Acts against which there is no right of private defence. There is no right of private defence
against an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if done,
or attempted to be done by a public servant acting in good faith under colour of his office, though that
act may not be strictly justifiable by law.
There is no right of  private  defence against an  act  which  does  not  reasonably  cause  the
apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if done, or attempted to be done, by the direction of a public
servant acting in good faith under colour of his office though that direction may not be strictly justifiable
by law.
There is no right of private defence in cases in which there is time to have recourse to the protection
of the public authorities.
Extent to which the right may be exercised. The right of private defence in no case extends to
the inflicting of more harm than it is necessary to inflict for the purpose of defence.
Explanation 1. A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against an act done, or
attempted to be done, by a public servant, as such, unless he knows, or has reason to believe, that the
person doing the act is such public servant.
Explanation 2. A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against an act done, or
attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant, unless he knows, or has reason to believe,
that the person doing the act is acting by such direction, or unless such person states the authority under
which he acts, or if he has authority in writing, unless he produces such authority, if demanded.
100. When  the  right  of  private  defence  of  the  body  extends  to  causing  death. The right of
private defence of the body extends, under the restrictions mentioned in the last preceding section, to
the voluntary causing of death or of any other harm to the assailant, if the offence which occasions
the exercise of the right be of any of the descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely:
First. — Such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that death will otherwise be
the consequence of such assault ;
Secondly. — Such  an  assault  as  may  reasonably  cause  the  apprehension  that  grievous  hurt  will
otherwise be the consequence of such assault ;
Thirdly. — An assault with the intention of committing rape ; Fourthly. —
An assault with the intention of gratifying unnatural lust ;
Fifthly.
Sixthly.
An assault with the intention of kidnapping or abducting ;
An assault with the intention of wrongfully confining a person, under circumstances
which  may  reasonably  cause  him  to  apprehend  that  he  will  be  unable  to  have  recourse  to  the  public
authorities for his release.
101. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death. If the offence be not of
any of the descriptions enumerated in the last preceding section, the right of private defence of the body
does not extend to the voluntary causing of death to the assailant, but does extend, under the restrictions
mentioned in section 99 to the voluntary causing to the assailant of any harm other than death.
102. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of the body. The right of
private defence of the body commences as soon as a reasonable apprehension of danger to the body
arises from an attempt or threat to commit the offence though the offence may not have been committed
; and it continues as long as such, apprehension of danger to the body continues.
103. When  the  right  of  private  defence  of  property  extends  to  causing  death. The right of
private defence of property extends, under the restrictions  mentioned in section 99, to the  voluntary
causing of death or of any other harm to the wrong-doer, if the offence, the committing of which, or the
attempting  to commit which,  occasions  the  exercise  of  the right, be  an  offence  of  any  of  the  des-
criptions hereinafter enumerated, namely: —
First. — Robbery ;
Secondly.— House­breaking by night ;
Thirdly.— Mischief by fire committed on any building, tent or vessel, which building, tent or vessel
is used as a human dwelling or as a place for the custody of property ;
Fourthly. — Theft, mischief or house trespass, under such circumstances as may reasonably cause
apprehension that death or grievous hurt will be the consequence, if such right of private defence is not
exercised.
104. When  such  right  extends  to  causing  any  harm other  than  death. If  the  offence,  the
committing of which, or the attempting to commit which, occasions the exercise of the right of private
defence, be theft, mischief, or criminal trespass, not of any of the descriptions enumerated in the last
preceding section, that right does not extend to the voluntary causing of death, but does extend, subject
to  the  restrictions  mentioned in section  99,  to  the  voluntary  causing  to  the  wrong-doer  of  any  harm
other than death.
105. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of property. The right of
private  defence  of  property  commences  when  a  reasonable  apprehension  of  danger  to  the  property
commences.
The right of private  defence  of property against theft continues till  the offender  has effected his
retreat with the property or either the assistance of the public authorities is obtained, or the property
has been recovered.
The right of private defence of properly against robbery continues as long as the offender causes
or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint or as long as the fear of instant
death or of instant hurt or of instant personal restraint continues.
The right of private defence of property against criminal trespass or mischief continues as long as
the offender continues in the commission of criminal trespass or mischief.
The right of private defence of property against house-breaking by night continues as long as the
house-trespass which has been begun by such house-breaking continues.