[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 228: Intentional insult  or  interruption  to  public  servant  sitting  in  judicial  proceeding

Whoever intentionally  offers any insult, or causes any interruption to any public servant, while such
public servant is sitting in any stage of a judicial proceeding, shall be punished with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to
3
[three thousand rupees],
or with both.
229. Personation  of  a  juror  or  assessor. Whoever,  by  personation  or  otherwise,  shall  inten-
tionally cause, or knowingly suffer himself to be returned, empanelled or sworn as a juryman or assessor
in any case in which he knows that he is not entitled by law to be so returned, empanelled or sworn, or
knowing himself to have been so returned, empanelled or sworn contrary to jaw, shall voluntarily serve
on such jury or as such assessor, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CHAPTER XII
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS
230. “Coin” defined.
1
[Coin is metal used for the time being as money, and stamped and issued by
the authority of some State or Sovereign Power in order to be so used.]
"Pakistan Coin".
2
[Pakistan coin is metal stamped and issued by the authority of the Government
of Pakistan in order to be used as money ; and
l
Subs. by the Indian Penal Code Arndt. Act, 1872 (19 of 1872), for the original paragraph.
2
The original paragraph has successively been amended by the Indian Penal Code (Arndt.) Act, 1896 (6 of 1896). s. 1(1), A. 0., 1937 and A. 0., 1949,
Sch., and A.O. 1961, Art. 2 and Sch. (w.e.f. 23rd March, 1956), to road as above.
3
Subs. by Ord. 86 of 02, s. 2 and Sch. I.
metal which has been so stamped and issued shall continue to be Pakistan coin for the purposes of
this Chapter, notwithstanding that it may have ceased to be used as money.]
Illustrations
(a) Cowries are not coin.
(b) Lumps of unstamped copper, though used as money, are not coin.
(c) Medals are not coin, inasmuch as they are not intended to be used as money.
1
* * * * * * *
231. Counterfeiting coin. Whoever counterfeits or knowingly performs any part of the process of
counterfeiting coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation. A person commits this offence who intending to practise deception, or knowing it
to  be  likely  that  deception  will  thereby  be  practised,  causes  a  genuine  coin  to  appear  like  a  different
coin.
232. Counterfeiting Pakistan coin. Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part of the
process  of  counterfeiting
2
[Pakistan  coin],  shall  be  punished with
3
[imprisonment for life], or with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
233. Making  or selling  instrument  for  counterfeiting  coin. Whoever  makes  or  mends,  or
performs  any  part  of  the  process  of making or mending, or  buys, sells or  disposes  of,  any die or
instrument, for the purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended to
be  used,  for  the  purpose  of  counterfeiting  coin,  shall  be  punished with  imprisonment of  either
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
234. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Pakistan coin. Whoever makes or mends,
or performs any part of the process of making or mending or buys, sells or disposes of, any die or
instrument, for the purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended to
be  used,  for  the  purpose  of  counterfeiting
2
[Pakistan  coin],  shall  be  punished with  imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.