[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/wp-content/uploads/2026/01/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT-ORDER1984-Amendment-up-to-date-2025.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

QSO Section 143: Court to decide when question shall be asked and when witness compelled to

answer.— If any such question relates to a matter not relevant to the suit or proceeding, except in so
far as it affects the credit of the witness by injuring his character, the Court shall decide whether or not
the  witness  shall  be  compelled  to  answer  it,  and  may,  if  it  thinks  fit,  warn  the  witness  that  he  is  not
obliged  to  answer  it.  In  exercising  its  discretion,  the  Court  shall  have  regard  to  the  following
considerations: —
(1) such  questions  are  proper  if  they  are  of  such  a  nature  that  the  truth  of  the  imputation
conveyed by them would seriously effect the opinion of the Court as to the credibility of the witness on
the matter to which he testifies;
(2) such  questions  are  improper  if  the  imputation  which  they  convey  relates  to  matters  so
remote in time, or of such a character, that the truth of the imputation would not affect, or would affect
in slight degree, the opinion of the Court as to the credibility of the witness on the matter to which he
testifies;
(3) such questions are improper if there is a great disproportion between the importance of the
importation made against the witness’s character and the importance of his evidence;
(4) the Court may, if it sees fit, draw, from the witness’s refusal to answer, the inference that
the answer if given would be unfavorable.
144. Question not to be asked without reasonable grounds. — No such question as is
referred  to  in  Article  143  ought  to  be  asked,  unless  the  person  asking  it  has  reasonable  grounds  for
thinking that the imputation which it conveys is well-founded.
Page 60 of 59
Illustrations
(a) An advocate is instructed by an attorney that an important witness is a dakait.
This is a reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he is a dakait.
(b) An advocate  is informed by a person in Court that an important witness is a dakait.
The informant, on being questioned by the advocate, given satisfactory reasons for his
statement. This is a reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he is a dakait.
(c) A  witness,  of  whom  nothing whatever  is  known,  is  asked  at  random  whether  he  is a
dakait. There are here no reasonable grounds for the question.
(d) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, being questioned as to his mode of life
and means of living, gives unsatisfactory answers. This may be a reasonable ground
for asking him if he is a dakait.