[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://khalidzafar.com/wp-content/files_mf/1527158791QanuneShahadatOrder1984.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-14

QSO Section 78: Proof of signature and handwriting of person alleged to have signed or written document

produced. If a document is alleged to be signed or to have been written wholly or in part by
any person, the signature of the handwriting of so much of the document as is alleged to be in
that person‘s handwriting must be proved to be in his handwriting.
COMMENTARY
Suit for specific performance of agreement to sell property. Disputed signatures. Plaintiff is
required to prove the signatures of the executant of the agreement.7
79. Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested. If a document is required by
law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until two attesting witnesses at least have
been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there be two attesting witnesses alive,
and subject to the process of the Court and capable of giving evidence:
Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an attesting witness in proof of the execution of
any document, not being a will, which has been registered in accordance with the provisions of
the Registration Act, 1908 (XVI of 1908), unless its execution by the person by whom it
purports to have been executed is specifically denied.
COMMENTARY
Revisional jurisdiction, exercise of. Courts below had recorded very cogent reasons for
decreeing plaintiff‘s suit by placing reliance upon circumstantial evidence as also on evidence on
record for coming to conclusion that neither document in question, was proved to have been
executed nor the same was verified in accordance with law. Original document was also not
placed on record. Findings recorded by Courts below on the question of execution of alleged
document being lawful could not be interfered with. Judgments and decrees of Courts below
were maintained in circumstances.8
Proof of execution of private document. Execution of such document had to be proved by
examining the scribe and an attesting witness. Such persons having not been examined,
document in question, would be deemed to have not been proved and could be excluded from
consideration.9
Agreement to sell. Proof and admissibility. Scribe of document when a competent witness.
Evidence of one marginal witness and scribe. Evidentiary value of. Agreement to sell was
proved through the statement of one marginal witness and scribe of the document in question.
Ordinarily a scribe who had merely scribed a document and handed it over to parties for their
signatures and the signatures of attesting witnesses would not become competent attesting
witness, if such document was executed elsewhere in his absence. Where, however, document
in question, was actually executed in presence of scribe and parties and attesting witnesses had
signed the same in his presence, he (scribe) could be treated as attesting witness although he
had not signed the document in that capacity.1
Agreement to sell. Execution of. Proof of. Parties had executed document in presence of scribe
and signed it. Even attesting witnesses had signed document in presence of scribe. Scribe can
be treated to be an attesting witness although he has not signed it in that capacity.
Requirements of provisions of Article 79 read with Article 17 of Qanun-e-Shahadat have been
substantially complied with. Admittedly original document as placed on record, but record
having been burnt, was reconstructed under orders of High Court. No objection was raised at
time of reconstruction of file regarding genuineness of agreement to sell. Held: No jurisdiction
defect in impugned judgments and decrees of Courts below or any misreading or non-reading
of evidence has been pointed out to justify interference in concurrent findings of fact recorded
by Courts below. Petition dismissed.2
Marginal witnesses of disputed deed. Evidentiary value of. No lacuna in the evidence of
marginal witnesses was apparent or pointed out, therefore, their veracity could not be
described. Evidence of such witnesses, alone was sufficient to prove the document in question,
even if other evidence was altogether ignored.3
Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested. Exception. Documents required
by law to be attested would not be used as evidence until two attesting witnesses, who if alive
were amenable to jurisdiction of Court and capable of giving evidence were produced. Not
necessary to call attesting witnesses to prove execution of a documents, which was (not a will)
registered in accordance with Registration Act, 1908, unless execution thereof, was specifically
denied by the person who allegedly executed the document. Document in question, being
registered one, and its existence having not been denied, its execution could be proved by
certified copy thereof.4
80. Proof where no attesting witness found. If no such attesting witness can be found, it must
be proved that the witness have either died, or cannot be found and that the document was
executed by the person who purports to have done so.
81. Admission of execution by party to attested document. The admission of a party to an
attested document of its execution by himself shall be sufficient proof of its execution as against
him, though it be a document required by law to be attested.
82. Proof when attesting witness denies the execution. If the attesting witness denies or does
not recollect the execution of the document, its execution may be proved by other evidence.
83. Proof of document not required by law to be attested. An attested document not required
by law to be attested may be proved as if it was un-attested.
84. Comparison of signature, writing or seal with others admitted or proved. (1) In order to
ascertain whether a signature, writing or seal is that of the person by whom it purports to have
been written or made any signature, writing or seal admitted or proved to the satisfaction of
the Court to have been written or made by that person may be compared with the one which is
to be proved, although that signature, writing or seal has not been produced or proved for any
other purpose.
(2) The Court may direct any person present in Court to write any words or figures for the
purpose of enabling the Court to compare the words or figures so written with any words or
figures alleged to have been written by such person.
(3) This Article applies also, with any necessary modifications, to finger-impressions.
COMMENTARY
Comparison of signatures. Genuineness. Trial Court‘s competency to compare signatures.
Where parties had not brought forward any expert witness to given opinion about genuineness
of signatures in question, trial Court would be competent to form its own opinion by comparing
disputed signatures with admitted signature.5
Comparison of signatures. High Court compared signatures of vendee on disputed document
with his signatures on admitted document to find out if the signatures were in fact of the same
person i.e., vendee.6
Comparison of signatures on questioned document with signatures on admitted documents by
Court. Deceased, whose signatures were in dispute being illiterate could not affix proper
signatures, therefore, his signatures would fall in the category of ―shaky signatures‖. Close
scrutiny of signatures on questioned documents when compared with admitted signatures,
revealed, prima faice that those signatures were of one and the same person. Trial Court had
thus, correctly discharged its duty while making comparison of disputed signatures with
admitted signatures.7
85. Public documents. The following documents are public documents: —
(1) documents forming the acts or records of the acts—
(i) of the sovereign authority;
(ii) of official bodies and tribunals; and
(iii) of public officers, legislative, judicial and executive, of any part of Pakistan, or of a foreign
country;
(2) public records kept in Pakistan of private documents;
(3) documents forming part of the records of judicial proceedings;
(4) documents required to be maintained by a public servant under any law; and
(5) registered documents the execution whereof is not disputed.
86. Private documents. All other documents are private.
87. Certified copies of public documents. Every public officer having the custody of a public
document, which any person has a right to inspect, shall give that person on demand a copy of
it on payment of the legal fees therefore, together with a certificate written at the foot of such
copy that it is a true copy of such document or part thereof, as the case may be, and such
certificate shall be dated and subscribed by such officer with his name and his official title, and
shall be sealed, whenever such officer is authorized by law to make use of a seal, and such
copies so certified shall be called certified copies.
Explanation. Any officer, who, by the ordinary course of official duty, is authorized to deliver
such copies, shall be deemed to have the custody of such documents within the meaning of this
Article.
88. Proof of documents by production of certified copies. Such certified copies may be produced
in proof of the contents of the public documents or parts of the public documents of which they
purport to be copies.
89. Proof of other public documents. The following public documents may be proved as follows:
–
(1) Acts, orders or notifications of the Federal Government in any of its departments, or of any
Provincial Government or any department of any Provincial Government by the records of the
departments, certified by the Heads of those departments respectively, or by any document
purporting to be printed by order of any such Government;
(2) the proceedings of the Legislatures,– by the journal of those bodies respectively, or by
published Acts or abstracts, or by copies purporting to be printed by order of the Government
concerned;
(3) the Acts of the Executive or the proceedings of the Legislature of a foreign country,– by
journals published by their authority, or commonly received in that country as such or by a copy
certified under the seal of the country or sovereign, or by a recognition thereof in some Federal
Act;
(4) the proceedings of a municipal body in Pakistan,– by a copy of such proceedings certified by
the legal keeper thereof, or by a printed book purporting to be published by the authority of
such body;
(5) public documents of any other class in a foreign country,– by the original, or by a copy
certified by the legal keeper thereof, with a certificate under the seal of a notary public, or of a
Pakistan Consul or diplomatic agent, that the copy is duly certified by the officer having the
legal custody of the original, and upon proof of the character of the document according to the
law of foreign country.
COMMENTARY
Foreign document. Mode of proof. Foreign document can be proved by the original or by
certified copy thereof, which must be certified by legal keeper of document, certificate of Notary
Public and Pakistan‘s Diplomatic Agent in that country. Presumption of genuineness and
accuracy would attach to certified copies of foreign judicial record, if they were certified in said
manner.8
PRESUMPTION AS TO DOCUMENTS
90. Presumption as to genuineness of certified copies. (1) The Court shall presume every
document purporting to be a certificate, certified copy or other document, which is by law
declared to be admissible as evidence of any particular fact and which purports to be duly
certified by any officer of the Federal Government or a Provincial Government to be genuine:
Provided that such document is substantially in the form and purports to be executed in the
manner directed by law in that behalf.
(2) The Court shall also presume that any officer by whom any such document purports to be
signed or certified, held, when he signed it, the official character which he claims in such
document.
91. Presumption as to documents produced as record of evidence. Whenever any document is
produced before any Court, purporting to be a record or memorandum of the evidence, or of
any part of the evidence, given by a witness is a judicial proceeding or before any officer
authorized by law to take such evidence or to be a statement or confession by any prisoner or
accused person, taken in accordance with law, and purporting to be signed by the Judge or
Magistrate or by any such officer as aforesaid, the Court shall presume—
that the document is genuine; that any statements as to the circumstances under which it was
taken, purporting to be made by the person signing it, are true, and that such evidence,
statement or confession was duly taken.
92. Presumption as to genuineness of documents kept under any law. The Court shall presume
the genuineness of every document purporting to be a document directed by any law to be kept
by any person, if such document is kept substantially in the form required by law and is
produced from proper custody.
93. Presumption as to maps or plans made by authority of Government. The Court shall
presume that maps or plans purporting to be made by the authority of the Federal Government
or any Provincial Government were so made, and are accurate; but maps or plans made for the
purposes of any cause must be proved to be accurate.
94. Presumption as to collections of laws and reports of decision. The Court shall presume the
genuineness of every book purporting to be printed or published under the authority of the
Government of any country, and to contain any of the laws of that country, and of every book
purporting to contain reports of decision of the Courts of such country.
95. Presumption as to powers-of-attorney. The Court shall presume that every document
purporting to be a power-of-attorney, and to have been executed before, and authenticated by,
a notary public, or any Court, Judge, Magistrate, Pakistan Consul or Vice-Consul, or
representative of the Federal Government, was so executed and authenticated.
96. Presumption as to certified copies of foreign judicial records. (1) The Court may presume
that any document purporting to be a certified copy of any judicial record of any country not
forming part of Pakistan is genuine and accurate, if the document purports to be certified in any
manner which is certified by any representative of the Federal Government in or for such
country to be the manner commonly in use in that country for the certification of copies of
judicial records.
(2) An officer who, with respect to any territory or place not forming part of Pakistan, is a
Political Agent therefore, as defined in section 3, clause (40), of the General Clauses Act, 1897
(X of 1897), shall for the purposes of clause (1), be deemed to be a representative of the
Federal Government in or for the country comprising that territory or place.
97. Presumption as to books, maps and charts. The Court may presume that any book to which
it may refer for information on matters of public or general interest, and that any published
map or chart, the statements or which are relevant facts and which is produced for its
inspection, was written and published by the person, and at the time and place, by whom or at
which it purports to have been written or published.
98. Presumption as to telegraphic messages. The Court may presume that message, forwarded
from a telegraph office to the person to whom such message purports to be addressed,
corresponds with a message delivered for transmission at the office from which the message
purports to be sent; but the Court shall not make any presumption as to the person by whom
such message was delivered for transmission.
99. presumption as to due execution, etc., of documents not produced. The Court shall
presume that every document, called for and produced after notice to produce, was attested,
stamped and executed in the manner required by law.
100. Presumption as to documents thirty years old. Where any document, purporting or proved
to be thirty years old, is produced from any custody which the Court in the particular case
considers proper, the Court may presume that the signature and every other part of such
document, which purports to be in the handwriting of any particular person, is in that persons;
handwriting, and, in the case of a document executed or attested, that it was duly executed
and attested by the persons by whom it purports to be executed and attested.
Explanation. For the purposes of this Article and Article 92, documents are said to be in proper
custody if they are in the place in which, and under the care of the person with whom, they
would naturally be; but no custody is improper if it is proved to have had a legitimate origin, or
it the circumstances of the particular case are such as to render such an origin probable.
Illustrations
(a) A has been in possession of landed property for long time. Her produces from his custody
deeds relating to the land, showing his titles to it. The custody is proper.
(b) A produces deeds relating to landed property of which he is the mortgagee. The mortgagor
is in possession. The custody is proper.
(c) A, a connection of B, produces deeds relating to lands in B‘s possession which were
deposited with him by B for safe custody. The custody is proper.
COMMENTARY
Presumption about genuineness of documents thirty years old. Raising of presumption or
refusing to raise presumption is discretionary with Court as Art 100 lays down that the Court
―may presume‖ and not that Court ―shall presume‖. However, like all other discretions,
discretion under Art. 100 should be exercised indicially. Court may refuse to raise presumption
where it has reasons to believe the document to be a fabrication or when grave suspicion
attaches to it.10
101. Certified copy of documents thirty years old. — The provisions of Article 100 shall apply to
such copy of a document referred to in that Article as is certified in the manner provided in
Article 87 and is not less than thirty years old; and such certified copy may be produced ill proof
of the contents of the document or part of the document of which it purports to be a copy.
CHAPTER VI
OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY
EVIDENCE