[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 337U: Arsh  for teeth

one-twentieth of the diyat.
(1) The arsh for causing itlaf of a tooth, other than a milk tooth shall be
Explanation.
of a tooth.
The impairment of the portion of a tooth outside the gum amounts to causing itiaf
(2) The arsh for causing itlaf of twenty or more teeth shall be equal to the value of diyat.
(3) Where the itlaf is of a milk tooth, the accused shall be liable to daman and may also be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year:
Provided that, where itlaf of a milk tooth impedes the growth of a new tooth, the accused shall be
liable to arsh specified in sub-section (1).
337V. Arsh for hair. (1) Whoever uproots
(a) all the hair of the head, beard, mustaches, eyebrow, eyelashes or any other part of the body
shall be liable to arsh equal to diyat and may also be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years as ta'zir;
(b) one eyebrow shall be liable to arsh equal to one-half of the diyat ; and
(c) one eyelash, shall be liable to arsh equal to one-fourth of the diyat.
(2) Where the hair of any part of the body of the victim are forcibly removed by any process not
covered  under  sub-section  (1),  the  accused  shall  be liable to daman and imprisonment of  either
description which may extend to one year.
337W. Merger of arsh. (1) Where  an accused causes more than one hurt, he shall  be liable to
arsh specified for each hurt separately:
Provided that, where
(a) hurt is caused to an organ, the accused shall be liable to arsh for causing hurt to such organ
and not for arsh for causing hurt to any part of such organ; and
(b) the wounds join together and form a single wound, the accused shall be liable to arsh for
one wound.
Illustrations
(i) A amputates Z’s fingers of the right hand and then at the same time amputates that hand from
the joint of his wrist. There is separate arsh for hand and for fingers. A shall, however, be
liable to arsh specified for hand only.
(ii) A twice stabs Z on his thigh. Both the wounds are so close to each other that they form into
one wound. A shall be liable to arsh for one wound only.
(2) Where, after causing hurt to a person, the offender causes death of such person by committing
qatl liable to diyat, arsh shall merge into such diyat :
Provided that the death is caused before the healing of the wound caused by such hurt.
337X. Payment of arsh. (1) The arsh may be made payable in a lump sum or in instalments
spread over a period of
1
[five] years from the date of the final judgement.
(2) Where a convict fails to pay arsh or any part thereof within the period specified in sub-section
(1),  the  convict  may  be  kept in  jail and  dealt within the same manner  as if sentenced  to simple
imprisonment until arsh is paid in full or may be released on bail if he furnishes security
1
[or surety]
equal to the amount of arsh to the satisfaction of the court
1
[or may be released on parole as may be
prescribed
1
[by] the rules.]
(3) Where a convict dies before the payment of arsh or any part thereof, it shall be recovered from
his estate.