[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 489D: Making   or   possessing   instruments   or   materials   for   forging   or   counterfeiting

currency-notes  or  bank-notes. Whoever  makes,  or  performs  any  part  of  the  process  of making, or
buys  or sells or  disposes  of,  or  has in his possession,  any machinery, instrument  or  material  for  the
purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended to be used, for forging
or counterfeiting any currency-note or bank-note, shall be punished with
3
[imprisonment for life], or
with imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  ten  years,  and  shall also be
liable to fine.]
1
Ss. 489A to 489D ins. by the Currency Notes Forgery Act, 1899 (12 of 1899), s. 2.
2
For  'counterfeiting'  and  'forging'  of  currency  Notes  and  Bank  Notes,  see  C.M.L.A.  Secretariat  Notification  No.  57/24  (259)  AJAG/CMLA/82,
4.3.1982.
3
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
4
For 'counterfeiting'  and  'forging'  of  currency  Notes  and  Bank  Notes,  see  C.M.L.A.  Secretariat  Notification  No.  57/24  (259)  AJAG/CMLA/82,
4.3.1982.
1
[489E. Making or using documents resembling currency-notes or bank-notes.
(1) Whoever makes,
or causes to be made, or uses for any purpose whatsoever, or delivers to any person, any document purporting to
be, or in any way resembling, or so nearly resembling as to be calculated to deceive, any currency-note or bank-note
shall be punished with
2
[imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine,
or with both].
(2) If any person, whose name appears on a document the making of which is an offence under sub-section
(1), refuses, without lawful excuse, to disclose to a police-officer on being so required the name and address of
the person  by whom it was  printed or otherwise made, he shall  be punished with
2
[imprisonment of  either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both].
(3) Where the name of any person appears on any document in respect of which any person is charged with
an offence under sub-section (1) or on any other document used or distributed in connection with that document
it may, until the contrary is proved, be presumed that person caused the document to be made.].
3
[489F. Dishonestly issuing a cheque.
Whoever dishonestly issues a cheque towards re-payment of a
loan or fulfillment of an obligation which is dishonoured on presentation, shall be punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both, unless he can establish, for which the burden of proof
shall rest on him, that he had made arrangements with his bank to ensure that the cheque would be honoured and
that the bank was at fault in not honouring the cheque.]
4
[“489G.   Couterfeting   or   using   documents   resembling   Prize   Bonds   or   unauthorized
sale thereof. Whoever counterfeits  or causes  to counterfeit, or delivers  to any  person, or performs any
act,  or uses for any purpose whatsoever, any document purporting to be, or in any manner resembling,
the Prize Bond or the Serial Number of Prize Bonds, or sells or promotes the sale of Prize Bonds or Serial
Number  of Prize  Bonds unless authorized by the Federal Government shall  be punished with the
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and with fine.”]
CHAPTER XIX
OF THE CRIMINAL BREACH OF CONTRACTS OF SERVICE
490. [Breach of contract of service during voyage or journey.] Rep. by the Workmen’s Breach of
Contract (Repealing) Act, 1925 (III of 1925), s. 2 and Sch.
491. Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person. Whoever, being bound
by a lawful contract to attend on or to supply the wants of any person who, by reason of youth, or of unsoundness
of mind, or of a disease or bodily weakness, is helpless or incapable of providing for his own safety or of sup-
plying his own wants, voluntarily omits so to do, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for  a
term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to
5
[six] hundred rupees, or with both.
1
S.489E.ins. by the Indian Penal Code (Amdt.) Act, 1943(6 of 1943), s.2.
2
Subs. by the Criminal Law (Amdt.) Act, 1976 (8 of 1976), s.2, for “fine which may extend to one hundred rupees”.
3
Ins. by Ord 85 of 2002, s.2,
4
Ins. by Act. 23 of 2012, s.2.
5
Sub.by ord.86 of 2002, S.2 and sch-I.
492. [Breach  of  contract  to  serve  at  distant  place  to  which  servant  is  conveyed  at master's
expense.] Rep. by the Workmen's Breach of Contract (Repealing) Act, 1925 (Ill of 1925), s. 2 and Sch.
CHAPTER XX
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAGE
493. [Cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully inducing a belief of lawful marriage.] Rep. by
the  Offences  of  Zina  (Enforcement  of  Hudood)  Ordinance, 1979 (VII of 1979), s. 19 (w.e.f. the 10th  day  of
February, 1979).
1
[493A. Cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully inducing a belief of lawful marriage. Every man
who deceitfully causes any woman who is not lawfully married to him to believe to believe that she is lawfully
married to him and to  cohabit with him in that belief,  shall  be punished with rigorous imprisonment for  a  term
which may extend to twenty-five years and shall also be liable to fine.]
494. Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife. Whoever, having a husband or wife living,
marries in any case in which such marriage is void by reason of its taking place during the life of such husband
or wife, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Exception. This section does not extend to any person whose marriage with such husband or wife has
been declared void by a Court of competent jurisdiction,
nor to any person who contracts a marriage during the life of a former husband or wife, if such husband or
wife, at the time of the subsequent marriage, shall have been continually absent from such person for the space
of  seven  years, and shall not have been heard of  by  such  person  as being alive within that time provided the
person contracting such  subsequent marriage shall,  before  such marriage takes  place, inform the person with
whom such marriage is contracted of the real state of facts so far as the same are within his or her knowledge.