[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-07-23

PPC Section 119: Public  servant  concealing  design  to  commit offence  which  it  is  his  duty  to  prevent

Whoever, being a public servant intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
facilitate the commission of an offence which it is his duty as such public servant to prevent,
voluntarily  conceals,  by  any  act  or  illegal  omission,  the  existence  of  a  design  to  commit  such
offence, or makes any representation which he knows to be false respecting such design,
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s.2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
If offence be committed ; shall, if the offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of
any description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term
of such imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for that offence, or with both ;
if  offence  be  punishable  with  death,  etc.  ; or  if  the  offence  be  punishable  with  death  or
2
[imprisonment for life], with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years ;
if  offence  be  not  committed. or,  if  the  offence  be  not  committed,  shall  be  punished  with
imprisonment of any description provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth
part of the longest term of such imprisonment or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with
both.
Illustration
A, an officer of police, being legally bound to give information of all designs to commit robbery
which may come to his knowledge, and knowing that B designs to commit robbery, omits to give such
information, with intent to facilitate the commission of that offence. Here A has by an illegal omission
concealed  the  existence  of B’s design, and is liable to  punishment  according  to  the provision of  this
section.
120. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with imprisonment. Whoever, intending
to  facilitate  or  knowing it to  be likely that  he will thereby  facilitate  the commission of  an  offence
punishable with imprisonment,
voluntarily  conceals,  by  any  act  or  illegal  omission,  the  existence  of  a  design  to  commit  such
offence, or makes any representation which he knows to be false respecting such design,
if offence be not committed ; shall, if the offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment
of  the  description  provided  for  the  offence,  for  a  term  which  may  extend  to  one-fourth,  and,  if  the
offence be not committed, to one-eighth, of the longest term of such imprisonment, or with such fine
as is provided for the offence, or with both.
1
[CHAPTER VA
CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY
120A. Definition of criminal conspiracy. When two or more persons agree to do, or cause to be
done,
__
(1) an illegal act, or
1
Ch. VA ins. by the Indian Criminal Law Amdt. Act, 1913 (8 of 1913), s. 3.
2
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972),s.2 and Sch., for “transportation for life”.
(2) an  act  which is not illegal by illegal means,  such  an  agreement is designated  a criminal
conspiracy:
Provided that no agreement except an agreement to commit an offence shall amount to a criminal
conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is done by one or more parties to such agreement  in
pursuance thereof.
Explanation. It is immaterial whether the illegal act is the ultimate object of such agreement, or
is merely incidental to that object.