[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

CPC Section 4: Amount of decrees for payment of money to be ascertained, and

immoveable property
available for their satisfaction.
__
(1) Upon the expiration of the said period,
the Collector shall appoint a day for hearing any representations which the
judgment-debtor and the decree-holders or claimants (if any) may desire to
make, and for holding such inquiry as he may deem necessary for informing
himself as to the nature and extent of such decrees and claims and of the
judgment-debtor's immoveable property, and may, from time to time, adjourn such
hearing and inquiry.
(2) Where there is no dispute as to the fact or extent of the liability of the
judgment-debtor to any of the decrees or claims of which the Collector is
informed, or as to the relative priorities of such decrees or claims, or as to the
liability of any such property for the satisfaction of such decrees or claims, the
Collector shall draw up a statement, specifying the amount to be recovered
for the discharge of such decrees, the order in which such decrees and claims
are to be satisfied, and the immoveable property available for that purpose.
(3) Where any such dispute arises, the Collector shall refer the same, with
a statement thereof and his own opinion thereon, to the Court which made the
original order for sale, and shall, pending the reference, stay proceedings relating
to the subject thereof. The Court shall dispose of the dispute if the matter thereof
is within its jurisdiction, or transmit the case to a competent Court for disposal, and
the final decision shall be communicated to the Collector, who shall then draw up
a statement as above provided in accordance with such decision.
5. When District Court may issue notices and hold inquiry. The Collector
may, instead of himself issuing the notices and holding the inquiry required by
paragraphs 3 and 4, draw up a statement specifying the circumstances of the
judgment-debtor and of his immoveable property so far as they are known to the
Collector or appear in the records of his office, and forward such statement to the
District Court ; and such Court shall thereupon issue the notices, hold the inquiry
and draw up the statement required by paragraphs 3 and 4 and transmit such
statement to the Collector.
6. Effect of decision of Court as to dispute. The decision by the Court of any
dispute arising under paragraph 4 or paragraph 5 shall, as between the parties
thereto, have the force of and be appealable as a decree.