[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/PPC.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-15

PPC Section 173: Preventing service of summons or other proceeding, or preventing publication thereof

Whoever in any manner intentionally prevents the serving on himself, or on any other person, of any
summons, notice or order proceeding from any public servant legal1y competent as such public servant,
to issue such summons, notice or order,
or intentionally prevents the lawful affixing to any place of any such summons, notice or order,
or intentionally removes any such summons, notice or order, from any place to which it is lawfully
affixed,
or intentionally prevents the lawful making of any proclamation, under the authority of any public
servant legally competent, as such public servant, to direct such proclamation to be made,
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with
fine which may extend to
5
[one thousand and] five hundred rupees, or with both ;
or, if the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in person or by agent, or to produce a
document in a Court of Justice, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine which may extend to
5
[three] thousand rupees, or with both.
174. Non-attendance  in  obedience  to  an  order  from  public  servant. Whoever,  being legally
bound to attend in person or by an agent at a certain place and time in obedience to a summons, notice,
order or proclamation proceeding from any public servant legally competent, as such public servant, to
issue the same,
intentionally omits to attend at that place or time, or departs from the place where he is bound to
attend before the time at which it is lawful for him to depart,
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with
fine which may extend to
5
[one thousand five hundred rupees], or with both;
or, if the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in person or by agent in a Court of
Justice, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to
5
[three] thousand rupees, or with both
1
[;]
2
[or,  if  the  proclamation  be  under  section  87  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  1898,  with
imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.]
Illustrations
(a) A,  being legally bound  to  appear  before  the
3
[High Court  of
4
[Sind]] in obedience  to  a
subpoena issuing from  that  Court,  intentionally omits to  appear.  A  has  committed  the
offence defined in this section.
1
Subs. by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2, and Sch., for full stop.
2
New para added ibid.
3
Subs. by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Act, 1951 (26 of 1951), s. 4 and III Sch., for “Supreme Court at Calcutta”.
4
Subs. by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Ordinance, 1981 (27 of 1981), s. 3 and II Sch., for “East Pakistan” which was previously
subs. by A. O., 1961, Art. 2, for “East Bengal” (w.e.f. 23rd March, 1956).
5
Subs. by Ord. 86 of 02, s. 2 & Sch. I.
(b) A,  being legally bound  to  appear  before  a Zila Judge,  as  a  witness, in obedience  to  a
summons  issued by  that Zila Judge,  intentionally omits to  appear.  A  has  committed  the
offence defined in this section.