[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

CPC Section 10: Appellate Court may require appellant to furnish security for

costs.– (1) The Appellate court may, in its discretion, either before the respondent
is called upon to appear and answer or afterwards on the application of the
respondent, demand from the appellant security for the costs of the appeal, or of
the original suit, or of both:
Where appellant resides out of Pakistan. Provided that the Court shall
demand such security in all cases in which the appellant is residing out of
Pakistan and is not possessed of any sufficient immovable property within
Pakistan other than the property (if any) to which the appeal relates.
(2) Where such security is not furnished within such time as the Court
orders, the Court shall reject the appeal.
11. Power to dismiss appeal without sending notice to Lower Court.–
(1) The Appellate Court, after sending for the record if it thinks fit so to do, and
after fixing a day for hearing the appellant or his pleader and hearing him
accordingly if he appears on that day, may dismiss the appeal without sending
notice to the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred and without
serving notice on the respondent or his pleader.
(2) If on the day fixed or any other day to which the hearing may be
adjourned the appellant does not appear when the appeal is called on for
hearing, the Court may make an order that the appeal be dismissed.
(3) The dismissal of an appeal under this rule shall be notified to the
Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred.
1
Substituted by the LawReforms Ordinance, 1972(12of 1972), s.2and Sch. For, full-stop.
2
Proviso added ibid.
12. Day for hearing appeal.- (1) Unless the Appellate Court dismisses the
appeal under rule 11, it shall fix a day for hearing the appeal.
(2) Such day shall be fixed with reference to the current business of
the Court, the place of residence of the respondent, and the time necessary for
the service of the notice of appeal, so as to allow the respondent sufficient time
to appear and answer the appeal on such day.