[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

CPC Section 22: Upon hearing respondent may be object to decree as if he had

preferred separate appeal.– (1) Any respondent though he may not have
appealed from any part of the decree, may not only support the decree on any
of the grounds decided against him in the Court below, but take any cross-
1
Re-numbered as sub-rule (1) of that rule by the Code of CivilProcedure (Amendt.) Act, 1990(4of 1990), s.2.
2
Re-numbered as sub-rule (1) of that rule by the Code of CivilProcedure (Amendt.) Act, 1990(4of 1990),s.2.
3
Sub-rule (2) added ibid.
objection to the decree which he could have taken by way of appeal,
provided he has filed such objection in the Appellate Court within one month
from the date of service on him or his pleader of notice of the day fixed for
hearing the appeal, or within such further time as the Appellate Court may see fit
to allow.
(2) Form of objection and provisions applicable thereto. Such
cross-objection shall be in the form of a memorandum and the provisions of rule
1, so far as they relate to the form and contents of the memorandum of appeal
shall apply thereto.
(3) Unless the respondent files with the objection a written
acknowledgment from the party who may be affected by such objection or his
pleader of having received a copy thereof, the Appellate Court shall cause a
copy to be served, as soon as may be after the filing of the objection, on such
party or his pleader at the expense of the respondent.
(4) Where, in any case in which any respondent has under this rule
filed a memorandum of objection, the original appeal is withdrawn or is
dismissed for default, the objection so filed may nevertheless be heard and
determined after such notice to the other parties as the Court thinks fit.
(5) The provisions relating to pauper appeals shall, so far as they can be
made applicable, apply to an objection under this rule.
23. Remand of case by Appellate Court.– Where the Court from whose
decree an appeal is preferred has disposed of the suit upon a preliminary point
and the decree is reversed in appeal, the Appellate Court may, if it thinks fit, by
order remand the case, and may further direct what issue or issues shall be tried
in the case so remanded, and shall send a copy of its judgment and order to the
Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred, with directions to re-admit the
suit under its original number in the register of civil suits, and proceed to
determine the suit; and the evidence (if any) recorded during the original trial
shall, subject to all just exceptions, be evidence during the trial after remand.
24. Where evidence on record sufficient.– Appellate Court may
determine case finally. Where the evidence upon the record is sufficient to
enable the Appellate Court to pronounce judgment, the Appellate Court may,
after resettling the issues, if necessary, finally determine the suit, notwithstanding
that the judgment of the court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has
proceeded wholly upon some ground other than that on which the Appellate Court
proceeds.