[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

QSO Section 47: Relevancy of certain evidence for proving, in subsequent proceeding, the truth of facts

therein stated.— Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or before any person authorised by law
to take it, is relevant for the purpose of proving, in a subsequent judicial proceeding, or in a later stage of the
same judicial proceeding, the truth of the facts which it states, when the witness is dead or cannot be found, or
is  incapable  of  giving  evidence,  or  is  kept  out  of  the  way  by  the  adverse  party,  or if  his  presence  cannot  be
obtained without an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, the Court considers
Page 28 of 59
unreasonable:
Provided that—
the proceeding was between the same parties or their representatives-in-interest;
the adverse party in the first proceeding had the right and opportunity to cross-examine;
the questions in issue were substantially the same in the first as in the second proceeding.
Explanation:— A criminal trial or inquiry shall be deemed to be a proceeding between the prosecutor
and the accused within the meaning of this Article.
STATEMENTS MADE UNDER SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
48. Entries in books of account when relevant.— Entries in books of accounts, regularly kept in
the course of business, are relevant whenever they refer to a matter into which the Court has to enquire, but such
statements shall not alone be sufficient evidence to charge any person with liability.
Illustration
A sues B for Rs. 1,000, and shows entries in his account books showing B to be indebted to him to this amount.
The entries are relevant, but are not sufficient, without other evidence, to prove the debt.
49. Relevancy  of  entry  in  public  record  made  in  performance  of  duty.— An  entry  in  any
public  or  other  official book,  register  or  record,  stating  a  fact  in  issue  or relevant  fact,  and  made  by  a  public
servant in the discharge of his official duty, or by any other person in performance of a duty specialy enjoined
by the law of the country in which such book, register or record is kept, is itself a relevant fact.
5
50. Relevancy  of  statements  in  maps,  charts  and  plans.— Statements  of  facts  in  issue  or
relevant facts made in published maps or charts generally offered for public sale, or in maps or plans made under
the  authority  of  the  Federal  Government  or  any  Provincial  Government,  as  to  matters  usually  represented  or
stated in such maps, charts or plans, are themselves relevant facts.