[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

CPC Section 9: Decree where nothing is found due or where mortgagee has been

over paid.–Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, if it appears, upon
taking the account referred to in rule 7, that nothing is due to the defendant or
1
Rule 8A Inserted by the Transfer of Property (Amendment) Supplementary Act, 1919(21of 1929), s.5.
that he has been overpaid, the Court shall pass a decree directing the defendant,
if so required, to re-transfer the property and to pay to the plaintiff the amount
which may be found due to him: and the plaintiff shall, if necessary, be put in
possession of the mortgaged property.
1
[10. Costs of mortgagee subsequent to decree.– In finally adjusting the
amount to be paid to a mortgagee in case of a foreclosure, sale or redemption,
the Court shall, unless in the case of costs or the suit the conduct of the mortgagee
has been such as to disentitle him thereto, add to the mortgage-money such costs
of the suit and other costs, charges and expenses as have been properly
incurred by him since the date of the preliminary decree for foreclosure, sale or
redemption up to the time of actual payment.
11. Payment of interest.– In any decree passed in a suit for foreclosure, sale
or redemption, where interest is legally recoverable, the Court may order
payment of interest to the mortgagee as follows, namely:-
a) interest upto the date on or before which payment of the amount
found or declared due is under the preliminary decree to be made by the
mortgagor or other person redeeming the mortgage -
i) on the principal amount found or declared due on the mortgage, at
the rate payable on the principal, or, where no such rate is fixed, at such rate as
the Court deems reasonable,
ii) on the amount of the costs of the suit awarded to the mortgagee,
at such rate as the Court deems reasonable from the date of the preliminary
decree, and
iii) on the amount adjudged due to the mortgagee for costs, charges
and expenses properly incurred by the mortgagee in respect of the
mortgage-security up to the date of the preliminary decree and added to the
mortgage money at the rate agreed between the parties, or, failing such rate,
at the same rate as is payable on the principle, or failing both such rates, at nine
per cent per annum; and
(b) subsequent interest up to the date of realization or actual payment at
such rate as the Court deems reasonable -
i) on the aggregate of the principal sums specified in clause (a) and of
the interest thereon as calculated in accordance with that clause; and
ii) on the amount adjudged due to the mortgagee in respect of such
further costs, charges and expenses as may be payable under rule 10.]
12. Sale of property subject to prior mortgage.– Where any property the
sale of which is directed under this Order is subject to a prior mortgage, the Court
may, with the consent of the prior mortgagee, direct that the property be sold free
from the same, giving to such prior mortgagee the same interest in the proceeds of
the sale as he had in the property sold.
13. Application of proceeds.– (1) Such proceeds shall be brought into
Court and applied as follows:-
1
Substituted ibid., s.6, for the originalrules 10and 11.
first, in payment of all expenses incident to the sale or properly incurred in
any attempted sale;
secondly, in payment of whatever is due to the prior mortgagee on account
of the prior mortgage, and of costs, properly incurred in connection therewith;
thirdly, in payment of all interest due on account of the mortgage in
consequence whereof the sale was directed, and of the cost of the suit in which
the decree directing the sale was made;
fourthly, in payment of the principal money due on account of that mortgage;
and
lastly, the residue (if any) shall be paid to the person proving himself to
the interested in the property sold, or if there are more such persons than
one, then to such persons according to their respective interests therein or upon
their joint receipt.
(2) Nothing in this rule or in rule 12 shall be deemed to affect the powers
conferred by section 57 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (IVof 1882)
14. Suit for sale necessary for bringing mortgaged property to sale.–
(1) Where a mortgagee has obtained a decree for the payment of money in
satisfaction of a claim arising under the mortgage, he shall not be entitled to bring
the mortgaged property to sale otherwise than by instituting a suit for sale in
enforcement of the mortgage, and he may institute such suit notwithstanding
anything contained in Order II, rule 2.
(2) Nothing in sub-rule (1) shall apply to any territories to which the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (IVof 1882) has not been extended.
1
[15. Mortgages by the deposit of title-deeds and charges.– All the
provisions contained in this Order which apply to a simple mortgage shall, so far as
may be, apply to a mortgage by deposit of title- deeds within the meaning of
section 58, and to a charge within the meaning of section 100 of the Transfer
of Property Act, 1882 (IVof 1882)]
___________
ORDER XXXV
INTERPLEADER
1. Plaint in interpleader-suits.– In every suit of interpleader the plaint
shall, in addition to other statements necessary for plaints, state -
(a) that the plaintiff claims no interest in the subject-matter in dispute
other than for charges or costs;
(b) the claims made by the defendants severally ; and
(c) that there is no collusion between the plaintiff and any of the
defendants.
2. Payment of thing claimed into Court.– Where the thing claimed is
capable of being paid into Court or placed in the custody of the Court, the
1
Substituted by the Transfer of Property (Amendment) Supplementary Act, 1929(21of 1929), s.7, for the originalrule 15.
Plaintiff may be required to so pay or place it before he can be entitled to any
order in the suit.
3. Procedure where defendant issuing plaintiff.– Where any of the
defendants in an interpleader- suit is actually suing the plaintiff in respect of the
subject-matter of such suit, the Court in which the suit against the plaintiff is
pending shall, on being informed by the Court in which the interpleader suit has
been instituted, stay the proceedings as against him; and his costs in the suit
so stayed may be provided for in such suit; but if, and in so far as, they are not
provided for in that suit, they may be added to his costs incurred in the
interpleader-suit.
4. Procedure at first hearing.– (1) At the first hearing the Court may -
(a) declare that the plaintiff is discharged from all liability to the
defendants in respect of the thing claimed, award him his costs, and dismiss him
from the suit; or
(b) if it thinks that justice or convenience so require, retain all parties until
the final disposal of the suit.
(2) Where the Court finds that the admissions of the parties or other
evidence enable it to do so, it may adjudicate the title to the thing claimed.
(3) Where the admissions of the parties do not enable the Court so to
adjudicate, it may direct -
(a) that an issue or issues between the parties be framed and tried, and
(b) that any claimant be made a plaintiff in lieu of or in addition to the
original plaintiff, and shall proceed to try the suit in the ordinary
manner.
5. Agents and tenants may not institute interpleader suits.–
Nothing in this Order shall be deemed to enable agents to sue their principals, or
tenants to sue their landlords, for the  purpose of compelling them to interplead
with any persons other than persons making claim
through such principals or the landlords.
Illustrations
(a) A deposits a box of jewels with B as his agent. C alleges that the
jewels were wrongfully obtained from him by A, and claims them
from B. B cannot institute an interpleader-suit against A and C.
(b) A deposits a box of jewels with B as his agent. He then writes to
C for the purpose of making the jewels a security for a debt due
from himself to C. A afterwards alleges that C's debt is satisfied, and
C alleges the contrary. Both claim the jewels from B. B may institute
an interpleader-suit against A and C.
6. Charge for plaintiff's costs.– Where the suit is properly instituted the
Court may provide for the costs of the original plaintiff by giving him a charge on
the thing claimed or in some other effectual way.
___________
ORDER XXXVI
SPECIAL CASE
1. Power to state case for Court opinion.– (1) Parties claiming to be
interested in the decision of any question of fact or law may enter into an
agreement in writing stating such question in the form of a case for the opinion of
the Court, and providing that, upon the finding of the Court with respect to such
question,-
a) a sum of money fixed by the parties or to be determined by the Court
shall be paid by one of the parties to the other of them ; or
b) some property, movable or immovable, specified in the agreement,
shall be delivered by one of the parties to the other of them; or
c) one or more of the parties shall do, or refrain from doing, some other
particular act specified in the agreement.
(2) Every case stated under this rule shall be divided into consecutively
numbered paragraphs, and shall concisely state such facts and specify such
documents as may be necessary to enable the Court to decide the question raised
thereby.
2. Where value of subject-matter must be stated.– Where the agreement
is for the delivery of any property, or for the doing, or the refraining from doing,
any particular act, the estimated value of the property to be delivered, or to which
the act specified has reference, shall be stated in the agreement.
3. Agreement to be filed and regietered as suit.– (1) The agreement, if
framed in accordance with
the rules hereinbefore contained, may be filed in the Court which would have
jurisdiction to entertain a suit, the amount or value of the subject-matter of which
is the same as the amount or value of the subject-matter of the agreement.
(2) The agreement when so filed, shall be numbered and registered as a
suit between one or more of the parties claiming to be interested as plaintiff or
plaintiffs, and the other or the others of them as defendant or defendants; and
notice shall be given to all the parties to the agreement, other than the party or
parties by whom it was presented.
4. Parties to be subject to Court's jurisdiction.– Where the agreement
has been filed, the parties to it shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Court
and shall be bound by the statements contained therein.
5. Hearing and disposal of case.– (1) The case shall be set down for
hearing as a suit instituted in the ordinary manner, and the provisions of this Code
shall apply to such suits so far as the same are applicable.
(2) Where the Court is satisfied, after examination of the parties or after
taking such evidence as it thinks fit,-
a) that the agreement was duly executed by them,
b) that they have a bona fide interest in the question stated therein, and
c) that the same is fit to be decided,
it shall proceed to pronounce judgement thereon, in the same way as in an
ordinary suit, and upon the judgement so pronounced a decree shall follow.
_________________
ORDER XXXVII
SUMMARY PROCEDURE ON NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
1
[1. Application of Order.– This order shall apply only to the High Court
2
[, to
the District Court, and to any other Civil Court notified in this behalf by the High
Court].]
2. Instituition of summary suits upon bills of exchange, etc.– (1)
All suits upon bills of exchange, hundies or promissory notes may, in case the
plaintiff desires to proceed hereunder, be instituted by presenting a plaint in the
form prescribed; but the summons shall be in Form No.4 in Appendix B or in
such other form as may be from time to time prescribed.
(2) In any case in which the plaint and summons are in such forms,
respectively the defendant shall
not appear or defend the suit unless he obtains leave from a Judge as hereinafter
provided so to appear and defend; and, in default of his obtaining such leave or of
his appearance and defence in pursuance thereof, the allegations in the plaint
shall be deemed to be admitted, and the plaintiff shall be entitled to a decree -
3
[(a) for the principal sum due on the instrument and for interest
calculated in accordance with the provisions of section 79 or
section 80, as the case may be, of the Negotiable Instruments
Act, 1881, (XXVI of 1881) up to the date of the institution of the suit,
or for the sum mentioned in the summons, whichever is less, and for
interest up to the date of the decree at the same rate or at such other
rate as the Court thinks fit; and
(b) for such subsequent interest, if any, as the Court may order under
section 34 of this Code; and
(c) for such sum for costs as may be prescribed:
Provided that, if the plaintiff claims more than such fixed sum for costs, the
costs shall be ascertained in the ordinary way.
(3) A decree passed under this rule may be executed forthwith.]
3. Defendant showing defence on merit to have leave to appear.– (1)
The Court shall, upon application by the defendant, give leave to appear and
to defend the suit, upon affidavits which disclose such facts as would make it
incumbent on the holder to prove consideration, or such other facts as the Court
may deem sufficient to support the application.
(2) Leave to defend may be given unconditionally or subject to such
terms as to payment into Court, giving security, framing and recording issues or
otherwise as the Court thinks fit.
1
The  originalrule  1has  successively  been  amended  by  A.O.,  1937A.O.,  1949,  the  CentralLaws  (Statute  Reform)  Ordinance,
1960(21of  1960),  s.3and  2nd  Sch.  (with  effect  fromthe  14th  October,  1955)  and  the  civilProcedure  and  Limititation
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1961(9of 1961), s.2, to read as above.
2
Substituted by the LawReforms Ordinance, 1972(12of 1972), s.2and Sch. for “and to the District Court’.
3
Substituted by the Negotiable Instruments (Interest) Act, 1926(30of 1926), section 4, for certain originalwords.
1
[(3) The provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1908 (IX of
1908) shall apply to applications under sub-rule (1)].
4. Power to set aside decree.– After decree the Court may, under special
circumstances, set aside the decree, and if necessary stay or set aside execution,
and may give leave to the defendant to appear to the summons and to defend the
suit, if it seems reasonable to the Court so to do, and on such terms as the Court
thinks fit.
5. Power to order bill, etc., to be deposited with officer Court.– In
any proceedings under this Order the Court may order the bill, hundi or note on
which the suit is founded to be forthwith deposited with an officer of the Court,
and may further order that all proceedings shall be stayed until the plaintiff
gives security for the costs thereof.