[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

QSO Section 102: Evidence of terms of contracts, grants and other disposition of property reduced to

form of document.— When the terms of a contract, or of a grant, or of any other disposition of property, have
been reduced to the form of a document, and in all cases in which any matter is required by law to be reduced to
the form of a document, no evidence shall be given in proof of the terms of such contract, grant or other disposition
of property, or of such matter, except the document itself, or secondary evidence of its contents in cases in which
secondary evidence is admissible under the provisions hereinbefore contained.
Exception 1. —When a public officer is required by law to be appointed in writing, and when it is shown
that any particular person has acted as such officer, the writing by which he is appointed need not be proved.
Exception 2.— Wills admitted to probate in Pakistan may be proved by the probate.
Explanation 1.— This Article applies equally to cases in which the contracts, grants or dispositions of
property referred to are contained in one document and to cases in which they are contained in more documents
than one.
Explanation 2.—Where there are more originals than one, one original only need be proved.
Explanation 3.—The statement, in any document whatever, of a fact other than the facts referred to in
this Article, shall not preclude the admission of oral evidence as to the same fact.
Illustrations
(a) If a contract be contained in several letters, all the letters in which it is contained must be
proved.
(b) If a contract is contained in a bill of exchange, the bill of exchange must be proved.
(c) If a bill of exchange is drawn in a set of three, one only need be proved.
(d) A  contracts,  in  writing  with  B,  for  the  delivery  of  indigo  upon  certain  terms.  The contract
mentions the fact that B had paid A the price of other indigo contracted for verbally on another
occasion.
Oral  evidence  is  offered  that  no  payment  was  made  for  the  other  indigo.  The  evidence  is
admissible.
(e) A gives B a receipt for money paid by B. Oral evidence is offered of the payment. The evidence
is admissible.
103. Exclusion of evidence of oral agreement.— When the terms of any such contract, grant or
other disposition of property, or any matter required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, have been
proved according to the last Article, no evidence of any oral agreement or statement shall be admitted, as between
the parties to any such instrument or their representatives in interest, for the purpose of contradicting, varying
adding to, or subtracting from, its terms :
Proviso (1) .— Any fact may be proved which would invalidate any document, or which would entitle
any person to any decree or order relating thereto; such as fraud, intimidation, illegality, want of due execution,
Page 43 of 59
want of capacity in any contracting party, want or failure of consideration, or mistake in fact or law.
Proviso (2) . —The existence of any separate oral agreement as to any matter on which a document is
silent,  and  which  is  not  inconsistent  with  its  terms  may  be  proved.  In considering  whether  or  not this  proviso
applies, the Court shall have regard to the degree of formality of the document.
Proviso (3) . —The existence of any separate oral agreement, constituting a condition precedent to the
attaching of any obligation under any such contract, grant or disposition of property, may be proved.
Proviso (4) .—The existence of any distinct subsequent oral agreement to rescind or modify any such
contract,  grant,  or  disposition  of  property,  may  be  proved,  except  in  cases  in  which  such  contract,  grant  or
disposition of property is by law required to be in writing, or has been registered according to the law in force for
the time being as to the registration of documents.
Proviso (5) . —Any usage or custom by which incidents not expressly mentioned in any contract are
usually annexed to contracts of that description, may be proved:
Provided that the annexing of such incident would not be repugnant to, or inconsistent with, the express
terms of the contract.
Proviso (6) .— Any fact may be proved which shows in what manner the language of a document is
reliated to existing facts.
Illustrations
(a) A policy of insurance is effected on goods “in ships from Karachi to London”. The goods are
shipped in a particular ship which is last. The fact that that particular ship was orally excepted
from the policy cannot be proved.
(b) A agrees absolutely in writing to pay B, Rs. 1,000 on the first March, 1984. The fact that, at the
same  time,  an  oral  agreement  was  made  that  the  money  should  not  be  paid  till  the  thirty-first
March cannot be proved.
(c) An estate called “the Khanpur estate” is sold by a deed, which contains a map of the property
sold. The fact that land not included in the map had always been regarded as part of the estate
and was meant to pass by the deed cannot be proved.
(d) A  enters  into a  written  contract  with  B  to  work  certain  mines,  the  property  of  B, upon  certain
terms. A was induced to do so by a misrepresentation of B’s as to their value. This fact may be
proved.
(e) A institutes a suit against B for the specific performance of a contract, and also prays that the
contract  may  be  reformed  as  to  one  of  its  provisions,  as  that  provision  was  inserted  in  it  by
mistake.  A  may  prove  that  such  a  mistake  was  made  as  would  by  law  entitle  him  to  have  the
contract reformed.
(f) A orders goods of B by a letter in which nothing is said as to the time of payment, and accepts
the goods on delivery. B sues A for the price. A may show that the goods were supplied on credit
for a term still unexpired.
(g) A sells B a horse and verbally warrants him sound. A gives B a paper in these words “Bought of
A a horse for Rs. 500”. B may prove the verbal warranty.
Page 44 of 59
(h) A hires lodging of B, and gives a card on which is written “Rooms, Rs. 200 a month.” A may
prove a verbal agreement that these terms were to include partial board.
A hires lodgings of B for a year, and regularly stamped agreement, drawn up by an advocate, is
made between them. It is silent on the subject of board. A may not prove that board was included
in the terms verbally.
(i) A applies to B for a debt due to A by sending a receipt for the money. B keeps the receipt and
does not send the money. In a suit for the amount A may prove this.
(j) A and B make a contract in writing to take effect upon the happening of a certain contingency.
The writing is left with B, who sues A upon it. A may show the circumstances under which it was
delivered.
104. Exclusion  of  evidence  against  application  of  document  to  existing  facts.— When
language used in a document is plain in itself, and when it applied accurately to existing facts, evidence may not
be given to show that it was not meant to apply to such facts.
Illustrations
A sells to B, by deed, “my estate at Rangpur containing 100 bighas”. A has an estate at Rangpur containing 100
bighas. Evidence may not be given of the fact that the estate meant to be sold was one situated at a different place and of a
different size.
105. Evidence  as  to  document  unmeaning  in  reference  to  existing  facts.— When language
used in a document is plain in itself, but is unmeaning in reference to existing facts, evidence may be given to
show that it was used in a peculiar sense.
Illustrations
A sells to B, by deed, “my house in Karachi”.
A  had  no  house  in  Karachi,  but  it appears  that  he  had  a  house  at  Keamari,  of  which  B  had  been  in
possession since the execution of the deed.
These facts may be proved to show that the deed related to the house at Keamari.