[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

CPC Section 93: Exercise of powers of Advocate General

2
[*   *   *].– The powers
conferred by sections 91 and 92 on the Advocate General may,
3
[* * * *], be, with
the previous sanction of the
4
[Provincial Government], exercised also by the
Collector or by such officer as the
5
[Provincial Government] may appoint in this
behalf.
PART VI
SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS
94. Supplemental Proceedings.– In order to prevent the ends of justice
from being defeated the Court may, if it is so prescribed,–
(a) issue a warrant to arrest the defendant and bring him before
the Court to show cause why he should not give security for
his appearance, and if he fails to comply with any order for
security commit him to the civil prison;
(b) direct the defendant to furnish security to produce any
property belonging to him and to place the same at the
disposal of the Court or order the attachment of any property;
(c) grant a temporary injunction and in case of disobedience
commit the person guilty thereof to the civil prison and order
that his property be attached and sold;
1
Substituted by the Code of Civil Procedure (Punjab Amendment) Act 2018 (XIV of 2018), published in the Punjab Gazette
(Extraordinary), dated: 20 March 2018, pp. 6695-6698, s. 13.
2
3
The words “outside the Presidency­towns” were omitted by
the  Adaptation  of  Central  Acts  and  Ordinances  Order,  1949
(G.G.O. No. 4 of 1949), published in the Gazette of Pakistan (Extraordinary), dated: 28 March 1949, pp. 223-283, Article 3 read
with the Schedule.
4
Substituted for the words “Local Government” by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, published
in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary), dated: 1 April 1937, pp. 75-344, Article 3 read with the First Schedule.
5
Ibid.
(d) appoint a receiver of any property and enforce the
performance of his duties by attaching and selling his property;
(e) make such other interlocutory orders as may appear to the
Court to be just and convenient.
1
[95. Compensation  for  obtaining  arrest,  attachment  or  injunction  on
insufficient   grounds.– (1)  Where,   in   any   suit   in   which   an   arrest   or
attachment has been effected or a temporary injunction is granted under the
last preceding section, it appears to the Court that:
(a) such  arrest,  attachment  or  injunction  was  applied  for
insufficient grounds; or
(b) there was no reasonable or probable ground for making
the application–
the Court may, on its own motion or on the application of
the  aggrieved  party,  award  such  punitive  compensation
as  it  deems  reasonable  to  the  aggrieved  party  for  the
expense and injury caused to him.
(2) In  addition  to  the  compensation  awardable  under  subsection
(1), the Court may also make an order directing the party at fault to deposit
such amount in the public exchequer as the Court deems just, as penalty for
abusing the process of the law and wasting the time of the Court.
(3) An  order  under  this  section  shall  bar  any  suit  for  compensation in
respect of such arrest, attachment or injunction.]
PART VII
APPEALS
APPEALS FROM ORIGINAL DECREES
96. Appeal from original decree.–
(1) Save where otherwise expressly
provided in the body of this Code or by any other law for the time being in force,
an appeal shall lie from every decree passed by any Court exercising original
jurisdiction to the Court authorized to hear appeals from the decisions of such
Court.
(2) An appeal may lie from an original decree passed ex parte.
(3) No appeal shall lie from a decree passed by the Court with the
consent of parties.