[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

CPC Section 12: Consequence of non-attendance, without  sufficient cause  shown,  of  party

ordered  to  appear  in  person.
_
Where a plaintiff or defendant, who has been
ordered to appear in person, does not appear in person, or show sufficient cause
to the satisfaction of the Court for failing so to appear, he shall be subject to all
the provisions of the foregoing rules applicable to plaintiffs and defendants,
respectively, who do not appear.
Setting aside Decree ex parte
2
[13. Setting aside decree ex-parte against defendant.
_
(1)] In any case
in which a decree is passed ex parte against a defendant, he may apply to the
Court by which the decree was passed for an order to set it aside; and if he
satisfies the Court that the summons was not duly served, or that he was
prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing when the suit was called on
for hearing, the Court shall make an order setting aside the decree as against
him upon such terms as to costs, payment into Court or otherwise as it thinks fit,
and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit:
Provided that where the decree is of such a nature that it cannot be set
aside as against such defendant only it may be set aside as against all or any of
the other defendants also[:]
3
4
[Provided further that no decree passed ex parte shall be set aside
merely on the ground of any irregularity in the service of summons, if the Court
is satisfied, for reason to be recorded, that the defendant had knowledge of the
date of hearing in sufficient time to appear on that date and answer the claim.]
1
New sub-rule (3) added by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1980(10of 1980), s. 14.
2
Rule  13  was  re-numbered  as  sub-rule  (1)  of  that  rule  by  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure  (Amendment)  Ordinance,  1980(10of
1980), s. 14.
3
Substituted by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (12 of 1972), s. 2and Sch., for the full-stop.
4
Proviso added ibid.
1
[(2) The provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1908 (IX  of
1908), shall apply to applications under sub-rule (1).]
14. No decree to be set aside without notice to opposite party. No
decree shall be set aside on any such application as aforesaid unless notice
thereof has been served on the opposite party.
2
[ORDER IXA
INTERMEDIATE DATES