[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

CPC Section 4: Procedure where plaintiff accepts deposit as satisfaction in

part.
_
(1) Where the plaintiff accepts such amount as satisfaction in part only of
his claim, he may prosecute his suit for the balance; and, if the court decides that
the deposit by the defendant was a full satisfaction  of the plaintiff's claim, the
plaintiff shall pay the costs of the suit incurred after the deposit and the costs
incurred previous thereto, so far as they were caused by excess in the plaintiff's
claim.
(2) Procedure where he accepts it as satisfaction in full. Where
the plaintiff accepts such amount as satisfaction in full of his claim, he shall
present to the Court a statement to that effect, and such statement shall be filed
and the Court shall pronounce judgment accordingly; and, in directing by whom
the costs of each party are to be paid, the Court shall consider which of the
parties is most to blame for the litigation.
Illustrations
(a) A owes B Rs.100 . B sues A for the amount, having made no
demand for payment and having no reason to believe that the delay caused by
making A demand would place him at a disadvantage. On the plaint being filed, A
pays the money into Court. B accepts it in full satisfaction of his claim, but the
Court should not allow him any costs, the litigation being presumably groundless
on his part.
(b) B sues A under the circumstances mentioned in illustration (a). On
the plaint being filed. A disputes the claim. Afterwards A pays the money into Court.
B accepts it in full satisfaction of his claim. The Court should also give B his costs
of suit, A's conduct having shown that the litigation was necessary.
(c) A owes B Rs 100, and is willing to pay him that sum without suit. B
claims Rs.150 and sues A for that amount. On the plaint being filed A pays Rs.100
into Court and disputes only his liability to pay the remaining Rs. 50. B accepts the
Rs. 100 in full satisfaction of his claim. The Court should order him to pay A's costs.
ORDER XXV
SECURITY FOR COSTS