[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

CPC Section 5: Where defendant may be called upon to furnish security for

production of property.– (1) Where, at any stage of a suit, the Court is
satisfied, by affidavit or otherwise, that the defendant, with intent to obstruct or
delay the execution of any decree that may be passed against him
__
1
The words “the civil” were omitted by the Civil Laws (Reforms) Act, 1994 ( XIV of 1994); assented to by the President on 27
July 1994; and, was published in the Gazette of Pakistan (Extraordinary), dated: 31 July 1994, pp. 683-688, s. 11.
(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property, or
(b)  is about to remove the whole or any part of his property
from the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, the court may direct the
defendant, within a time to be fixed by it, either to furnish security, in such sum as
may be specified in the order, to produce and place at the disposal of the Court,
when required, the said property or the value of the same, or such portion thereof
as may  be sufficient to satisfy the decree, or to appear and show cause why he
should not furnish security.
(2) The plaintiff shall, unless the Court otherwise directs, specify the
property required to be attached and the estimated value thereof.
(3) The Court may also in the order direct the conditional attachment of
the whole or any portion of the property so specified.
6. Attachment where cause not shown or secuirty not furnished.– (1)
Where the defendant fails to show cause why he should not furnish security, or
fails to furnish the security required, within the time fixed by the Court, the Court
may order that the property specified, or such portion thereof as appears
sufficient to satisfy any decree which may be passed in the suit, be attached.
(2) Where the defendant shows such cause or furnishes the required
security, and the property specified or any portion of it has been attached, the
Court shall order the attachment to be withdrawn, make such other order as it
thinks fit.
7. Mode of making attachment.– Save as otherwise expressly provided,
the attachment shall be made in the manner provided for the attachment of
property in execution of a decree.
8. Investigation of claim to property attached before judgment.–
Where any claim is preferred to property attached before judgment, such claim
shall be investigated in the manner hereinbefore provided for the investigation
of claims to property attached in execution of a decree for the payment of money.