[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

QSO Section 56: Relevancy and effect of judgments, orders or decrees, other than those mentioned in

Article 55.— Judgments, orders or decrees other than those mentioned in Article 55 are relevant if they relate
to matters of a public nature relevant to the enquiry ; but such judgments, orders or decrees are not conclusive
proof of that which they state.
Illustrations
A sues B for trespass or his land, B alleges the existence of a public right of way over the land, which A denies.
The existence of a decree in favour of the defendant, in a suit by A against C for a trespass on the same land, in
which C alleged the existence of the same right of way, is relevant, but it is not conclusive proof that the right of way exists.
57. Judgments, etc., other than those mentioned in Articles 54 to 56, when relevant.—
Judgments,  orders or decrees, other than those mentioned in Articles 54, 55 and 56, are irrelevant, unless the
existence of such judgment, order or decree is a fact in issue, or is relevant under some other provision of this
Order.
Illustrations
(a) A and B separately sue C for a libel which reflects upon each of them, C in each case says that
the matter alleged to be libellous is true, and the circumstances are such that it is probably true
in each case, or in neither.
Page 30 of 59
A  obtains  a  decree  against  C  for  damages  on  the  ground  that  C  falled  to  make  out  his
justification. The fact is irrelevant as between B and C.
(b) A prosecutes B for adultery with C, A’s wife.
B denies that C is A’s wife but the Court convicts B of adultery.
Afterwards, C is prosecuted for bigamy in marrying B during A’s lifetime. C says that she never
was A’s wife.
The judgment against B is irrelevant as against C.
(c) A prosecutes B for stealing a cow from him, B is convicted. A afterwards sues C for the cow,
which B had sold to him before his conviction. As between A and C, the judgment against B is
irrelevant.
(d) A  has  obtained  a  decree  for  the  possession  of  land  against  B,  C,  B’s  son,  murders  A  in
consequence.
The existence of the judgment is relevant, as showing motive for a crime.
(e) A  is  charged  with  theft  and  with  having  been  previously  convicted  of  theft.  The  previous
conviction is relevant as a fact in issue.
(f) A is tried for the murder of B. The fact that B prosecuted A for libel and that A was convicted
and sentenced is relevant and under Article 21 as showing the motive for the fact in issue.