[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

CPC Section 4: But not that he died on the 1st April, 1896

5.
NO. 12
NOTICE TO PRCDUCE (GENERAL FORM). (o. 12, r. 8) (Title as in No. 1,
supra)
Take notice that you are hereby required to produce and show to the Court at
the first hearing of this suit all books, papers, letters, copies of letters and other
writings and documents in your custody, possession or power, containing any
entry, memorandum or minute relating to the matters in question in this suit, and
particularly.
G. H., pleader [or agent] for plaintiff [or defendant].
To E. F., pleader [or agent] for defendant [or plaintiff].
Costs of Suits
Plaintiff  Defendant
Rs. A. P.
Rs
A.
P.
1.Stamp for plaint      Stamp for power ..
2.Do. for power ..     Do. for petition ..
3.Do for exhibits ..     Pleader's fee ..
4.Pleader's fee on Rs.     "Subsistence for witnesses
5.Subsistence for witnesses.     Service of process
6.Commissioner's fee     Commissioner's fee
7.Service of process. .
NO. 2.
SIMPLE MONEY DECREE. (Section 34) (Title)
Claim for
This suit coming on this day for final disposal before for the plaintiff and of in the
presence of for the defendant, it is ordered that the do pay to the the sum of Rs.
with interest thereon at the rate of per cent per annum from to the date of
realization of the said sum and do also pay Rs.        , the costs of this suit, with
interest thereon at the rate of per cent per annum from this date to the date of
realization.
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this day of 19 .
Judge
Costs of Suits
Plaintiff  Defendant
Rs.
A.
P.
Rs
A.
P.
1.Stamp for plaint ..     Stamp for power ..
2.Do. for power .     Do. for petition ..
3.Do for exhibits .     Pleader's fee ..
4.Pleader's fee on Rs.     "Subsistence for witnesses
5.Subsistence for
witnesses.
Service of process
6.Commissioner's fee     Commissioner's fee
7.Service of process. .
1
[NO. 3
PRELIMINARY DECREES FOR FORECLOSURE Order XXXIV, rule.
2.-Where accounts are directed to be taken)
(Title)
This suit coming on this............day, etc.; It is hereby ordered and decreed that it
be referred to as the Commissioner to take the accounts of following:-
(i) an account of what is due on this date to the plaintiff for principal and
interest on his mortgage mentioned in the plaint (such interest to be
computed at the rate payable on the principal or where no such rate is
fixed, at six per cent, per annum or at such rate as the Court deems
reasonable);
(ii) an account of the income of' the mortgaged property received up to this
date by the plaintiff or by any other person by the order or for the use
of the plaintiff or which without the willful default of the plaintiff or such
person might have been so received;
(iii) an account of all sums of money properly incurred by the plaintiff up to
this date for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in
respect of the mortgage-security, together with interest thereon (such interest to
be computed at the rate agreed between the parties, or, failing such rate, at the
same rate as is payable on the principal, or, falling both such rates, at nine per
cent-per annum);
(iv) an account of any loss or damage caused to the mortgaged property before
this date by any act or omission of the plaintiff which is destructive of, or
permanently injurious to, the property or by his failure to perform any of the duties
imposed upon him by any law for the time being force or by the terms of the
mortgage-deed.