[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

QSO Section 145: Procedure of Court in case of question being asked without reasonable grounds

If the Court is of opinion that any such question was asked without reasonable grounds, it may, if it was asked by
any advocate, report the circumstances of the case to the High Court or other authority to which such advocate is
subject in the exercise of his profession.
146. Indecent and scandalous question.— The Court may forbid any question or inquiries which
it regards as indecent or scandalous, although such questions or inquiries may have some bearing on the questions
before the Court, unless they relate to facts in issue, or to matters necessary to be known in order to determine
whether or not the facts in issue existed.
147. Procedure  of  Court  in  cases  of  defamation,  libel  and  slander.— When  a  person  is
prosecuted or used for making or publishing an imputation of a defamatory, libelous or slanderous nature, the
Court shall not, before it has recorded its findings on the issues whether such person did make or publish such
imputation, and whether such imputation is true, permit any question to be put to any witness for the purpose of
injuring the character of the person in respect of whom such imputation has, or is alleged to have, been made, or
any other person, whether dead or alive, in whom he is interested, except in so far as any such question may be
necessary for the purpose of determining the truth of the imputations alleged to have been made or published.
148. Questions intended to insult or annoy.— The Court shall forbid any question which appears
to it to be intended to insult or annoy, or which, though proper in itself, appears to the Court needlessly offensive
in form.
149. Exclusion  of  evidence  to  contract  answers  to  questions  testing  veracity.— When  a
witness has been asked and has answered any question which is relevant to the inquiry only in so far as it tends
to  shake  his  credit  by  injuring  his  character,  no  evidence  shall  be  given  to  contradict  him;  but,  if  he  answers
falsely, he may afterwards be charged with giving false evidence.
Exception 1.—If a witness is asked whether he has been previously convicted of any crime denies it,
evidence may be given of his previous conviction.
Exception 2.—If a witness is asked any question tending to impeach his impartiality and answers it by
denying the facts suggested, he may be contradicted.
Illustrations
(a)  A claim against an underwriter is resisted on the ground of fraud.
The claimant is asked whether, in a former transaction, he had not made a fraudulent claim. He
denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that he did make such a claim. The evidence is inadvissible.
(b) A witness is asked whether he was not dismissed from a situation for dishonesty. He denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that he was dismissed for dishonesty.
Page 57 of 59
The evidence is not admissible.
(c) A affirms that on a certain day he saw B at Lahore.
A is asked whether he himself was not on that day at Faisalabad. He denies it. Evidence is offered
to show that A was on that day at Faisalabad.
The  evidence  is  admissible,  not  as  contradicting  A  on  a  fact  which  affects  his  credit,  but  as
contradicting the alleged fact that B was seen on the day in question in Lahore.
In  each  of  these  cases  the  witness  might,  if  his  denial  was  false,  be  charged  with  giving  false
evidence.
(d) A is asked whether his family has not had a bloodfeud with the family of B against whom he
gives evidence.
He  denies  it.  He  may  be  contradicted  on  the  ground  that  the  question  tends  to  impeach  his
impartiality.
150. Question by party to his own witness.— The Court may, in its discretion, permit the person
who calls a witness to put any questions to him which might be put in cross-examination by the adverse party.
151. Impeaching credit of witness.— The credit of a witness may be impeached in the following
ways by the adverse party, or, with the consent of the Court, by the party who calls him:
(1) by the evidence of persons who testify that they, from their knowledge of the witness, believe him
to be unworthy of credit;
(2) by proof that the witness has been bribed, or has accepted the offer of a bribe, or has received any
other corrupt inducement to give his evidence ;
(3) by  proof  of  former  statements  inconsistent  with  any  part  of  his  evidence  which  is  liable  to  be
contradicted ;
[* * *****]
13
Explanation.—A  witness declaring  another  witness  to  be  unworthy  of  credit  may  not,  upon  his
examination-in-chief, give reasons for his belief, but he may be asked his reasons in crossexamination, and the
answers  which  he  gives  cannot  be  contradicted,  though,  if  they  are  false, he  may  afterwards  be  charged  with
giving false evidence.
Illustrations
(a) A sues B for the price of goods sold and delivered to B. C. says that A delivered the goods to B.
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, he said that he had not delivered the
goods to B.
The evidence is admissible.
11
Omitted clause (4) of Article 151, by Act No. XLIV of 2016, s. 16.
Page 58 of 59
(b) A is indicated for the murder of B.
C says that B, when dying, declared that A had given B the wound of which he died.
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, C said that the wound was not given by
A or in his presence.
The evidence is admissible.
152. Questions  tending  to  corroborate  evidence  of  relevant  fact  admissible.— When  a
witness whom it is intended to corroborate gives evidence of any relevant fact, he may be questioned as to any
other circumstances which he observed at or near to the time or place at which such relevant fact occurred if the
Court is of opinion that such circumstances, if proved, would corroborate the testimony of the witness as to the
relevant fact which he testifies.
Illustration
A, on accomplice, gives an account of robbery in which he took part. He describes various incidents unconnected
with the robbery which occurred on his way to and from the place where it was committed.
Independent evidence of these facts may be given in order to corroborate his evidence as to the robbery itself.