[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

QSO Section 58: Fraud  or  collusion  in  obtaining  judgment,  or  Incompetency  of  Court,  may  be

proved.— Any party to a suit or other proceeding may show that any judgment, order or decree which is relevant
under  Articles  54,  55  or  56,  and  which  has  been  proved  by  the  adverse  party,  was  delivered  by  a  Court  not
competent to deliver it, or was obtained by fraud or collusion.
OPINION OF THIRD PERSONS WHEN RELEVANT
59. Opinions of experts.— When the Court has to form an opinion upon a point of foreign law, or
of  science,  or  art,
6
[or  bomb  disposal] or  as  to  identity  of  hand-writing  or  finger  impressions,
7
[or  as  to
authenticity and integrity of electronic documents made by or through an information system] the opinions upon
that point of persons specially skilled in such foreign law, science or art,
8
[or bomb disposal]  or in questions as
to  identity  of  hand-writing  or  finger  impressions
9
[or  as  to  the  functioning,  specifications,  programming  and
operations of information systems, are relevant facts.]
Such persons are called experts.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether the death of A was caused by poison. The opinion of experts as to the
symptoms produced by the poison by which A is supposed to have died, are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A, at the time of doing a certain act, was by reason of unsoundness of mind,
incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he was doing what was either wrong or contrary to law.
6
Word Inserted by Federal Act, No. XXXIX of 2023 S. 2, dated 5/8/2023
7
Ins. certain words by Ord. No L1 of 2002, s. 29 and schedule.
8
Word Inserted by Federal Act, No. XXXIX of 2023 S. 2, dated 5/8/2023
9
Subs. ibid for “are relevant facts”
Page 31 of 59
The opinions of experts upon the question whether the symptoms exhibited by A commonly show unsoundness of mind, and
whether such unsoundness of mind usually renders persons incapable of knowing the nature of the acts which they do, or
of knowing that what they do is either wrong or contrary to law, are relevant.
(c) The question is, whether a certain document was written by A. Another document is produced
which is proved or admitted to have been written by A.
The opinions of experts on the question whether the two documents were written by the same
person or by different persons, are relevant.
60. Facts bearing upon opinions of experts.— Facts, not otherwise relevant, are relevant if they
support or are inconsistent with the opinions of experts, when such opinions are relevant.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A was poisoned by a certain poison. The fact that other persons, who
were poisoned by  that poison, exhibited certain symptoms which experts affirm  or deny to be
the symptoms that poison, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether an obstruction to a harbour is caused by a certain sea wall.
The fact that other harbours similarly situated in other respects, but where there were no such
sea-walls, began to be obstructed at about the same time, is relevant.
61. Opinion as to hand-writing when relevant.— When the Court has to form an opinion as
to the person by whom any document was written or signed, the opinion of any parson acquainted with the hand-
writing of the person by whom it is supposed to be written or signed that it was or it was not written or signed
by that person, is a relevant fact.
Explanation.—A person is said to be acquainted with the hand-writing of another person when he has
seen that person write, or when he has received documents purporting to be written by that person in answer to
documents written by himself or under his authority and addressed to that person, or when, in the ordinary course
of business, documents purporting to be written by that person have been habitually submitted to him.
Illustrations
The question is, whether a given letter is in the hand-writing of A, a merchant in London.
B is a merchant in Peshawar, who has written letters addressed to A and received letters purporting to
be written by him, C is B’s clerk, whose duty it was to examine and file B’s correspondence. D is B’s
broker,  to  whom  B  habitually  submitted  the  letters purporting  to  be  written  by  A  for  the  purpose  of
advising him thereon.
The opinion of B, C and D on the question whether the letter is in the hand-writing of A
are relevant, though neither B, C or D ever saw A write.
62. Opinion as to existence of right or custom, when relevant.— When the Court has to form
an opinion as to the existence of any general custom or right, the opinion, as to the existence of such custom or
right, of persons who would be likely to know of its existence if it existed, are relevant.
Explanation.—The expression “general custom or right” includes customs or rights common to any
Page 32 of 59
considerable class of persons.
Illustrations
The right of the villagers of a particular village to use the water of a particular well is a general right within the meaning
of this Article.