[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

CPC Section 25: Where Appellate Court may frame issues and refer them for trial

to Court whose decree appealed from.– Where the court from whose decree
the appeal is preferred has omitted to frame or try any issue, or to determine any
question of fact, which appears to the Appellate Court essential to the right
decision of the suit upon the merits, the Appellate Court may, if necessary, frame
issues, and refer the same for trial to the Court from whose decree the appeal is
preferred, and in such case shall direct such Court to take the additional evidence
required;
and such court shall proceed to try such issues, and shall return the
evidence to the Appellate Court together with its findings thereon and the reasons
therefore.
26. Findings and evidence to be put on record.– Objections to findings.–
(1) Such evidence and findings shall form part of the record in the suit; and either
party may, within a time to be fixed by the Appellate Court, present a
memorandum of objections to any findings.
(2) Determination of appeal. After the expiration of the period so
fixed for presenting such memorandum the Appellate Court shall proceed to
determine the appeal.
27. Production of additional evidence in Appellate Court.– (1) The
parties to an appeal shall not be entitled to produce additional evidence,
whether oral or documentary, in the Appellate Court. But if -
(a) the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has refused to
admit evidence which ought to have been admitted, or
(b) the Appellate Court requires any document to be produced or any
witness to be examined to enable it to pronounce judgment, or for any other
substantial cause, the Appellate Court may allow such evidence or document
to be produced, or witness to be examined.
(2) Wherever additional evidence is allowed to be produced by an
Appellate Court, the Court shall record the reason for its admission.
28. Mode of taking additional evidence.– Wherever additional evidence is
allowed to be produced, the Appellate Court may either take such evidence, or
direct the Court from whose decrees the appeal is preferred, or any other
subordinate Court, to take such evidence and to send it when taken to the
Appellate Court.
29. Points to be defined and recorded.– Where additional evidence is
directed or allowed to be taken, the Appellate Court shall specify the points to
which the evidence is to be confined, and record on its proceedings the points so
specified.
Judgment in Appeal
30. Judgment when and where pronounced.– The Appellate Court, after
hearing the parties or their pleaders and referring to any part of the
proceedings whether on appeal or in the Court from whose decree the appeal is
preferred, to which reference maybe considered necessary, shall pronounce
judgment in open Court, either at once or on some future day of which notice
shall be given to the parties or their pleaders.
31. Contents, date and signature of judgment.– The judgment of the
Appellate Court shall be in writing and shall state
__
(a) the points for determination;
(b) the decision thereon;
(c) the reasons for the decision; and
(d) where the decree appealed from is reversed or varied, the relief to
which the appellant is entitled;
and shall at the time that it is pronounced be signed and dated by the Judge
or by the Judges concurring therein.
32. What judgment may direct.– The judgment may be for confirming,
varying or reversing the decree from which the appeal is preferred, or, if the
parties to the appeal agree as to the form which the decree in appeal shall take,
or as to the order to be made in appeal, the Appellate Court may pass a decree
or make an order accordingly.
33. Power of Court of Appeal.– The Appellate Court shall have power to
pass any decree and make any order which ought to have been passed or
made and to pass or make such further or other decree or order as the case may
require, and this power may be exercised by the Court  notwithstanding that the
appeal is as to part only of the decree and may be exercised in favour of all or
any of the respondents or parties although such respondents or parties may not
have filed any appeal or objection:
1
[Provided that the Appellate Court shall not make any order under section 35A,
in pursuance of any objection on which the Court from whose decree the appeal
is preferred has omitted or refused to make such order.]
Illustration
A claims a sum of money as due to him form X or Y, and in a suit against both
obtains a decree against X. X appeals and A and Y are respondents. The
Appellate Court decides in favour of X. It has power to pass a decree against Y.
34. Dissent to be recorded.– Where the appeal is heard by more Judges
that one, any Judge dissenting from the judgment of the Court shall state in
writing the decision or order which he thinks should be passed on the appeal, and
he may state his reasons for the same.
Decree in Appeal
35. Date and contents of decree.– (1) The decree of the Appellate Court
shall bear date the day on which the judgment was pronounced.
(2) The decree shall contain the number of the appeal, the names and
descriptions of the appellant and respondent, and a clear specification of the relief
granted or other adjudication made.
(3) The decree shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the
appeal, and by whom, or out of what property, and in what proportions such costs
and the costs in the suit are to be paid.
(4) The decree shall be signed and dated by the Judge or Judges who
passed it:
Judge dissenting from judgment need not sign decree. Provided that where
there are more Judges than one and there is a difference of opinion among
them, it shall not be necessary for any Judge dissenting from the judgment of the
Court to sign the decree.
36. Copies of judgment and decree to be furnished parties.– Certified
copies of the judgment and decree in appeal shall be furnished to the parties on
application to the Appellate Court and at their expense.
1
Proviso  Inserted  by  the  civilProcedure  (Amendment) Act,  1922(9of 1922),  which  under  s.  1(2)  thereof  may  be  brought  into
force in any Province by the ProvincialGovernment on any specified date. The Act has been brought into force in the Punjab,
and Sind.