[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

QSO Section 127: Proof  of  good  faith  in  transactions  where  one  party  is  in  relation  of  active

confidence.— When there is a question as to the good faith of a transaction between parties, one of whom stands
to the other in a position of active confidence, the burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the
party who is in a position of active confidence.
Illustrations
(a) The good faith of a sale by a client to an advocate is in question in a suit brought by the client. The
burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the advocate.
(b) The good faith of a sale by a son just come of age to a father is in question in a suit brought by the
son. The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the father.
128. Birth during marriage conclusive proof of legitimacy.—(1) The fact that any person was
born during the continuance of a valid marriage between his mother and any man and not earlier than the
expiration of six lunar months from the date of the marriage, or within two years after its dissolution, the
mother remaining unmarried, shall be conclusive proof that he is the legitimate child of that man, unless—
(a) the husband had refused, or refuses, to own the child ; or
(b) the child was born after the expiration of six lunar months from the date on which the
woman had accepted that the period of iddat had come to an end.
(2) Nothing contained in clause (1) shall apply to a non-Muslim if it is inconsistent with his faith.
129. Court may presume existence of certain facts.— The Court may presume the existence of
any fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being had to the common course of natural events, human
conduct and public and private business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case.
Illustrations
The Court may presume—
(a) that  a  man  who  is  in  possession  of  stolen  goods  soon  after  the  theft  is  either  the  thief  or  has
received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for his possession ;
(b) that an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in material particulars ;
(c) that a bill of exchange, accepted or endorsed, was accepted or endorsed for good consideration
Page 52 of 59
;
(d) that a thing or state of things which has been shown to be in existence within a period shorter
than that within which such things or states of things usually cease to exist, is still in existence ;
(e) that judicial and official acts have been regularly performed ;
(f) that the common course of business has been followed in particular cases;
(g) that  evidence  which  could  be  and  is  not  produced  would,  if produced,  be  unfavourable  to  the
person who withholds it ;
(h) that,  if  a  man  refuses  to  answer  a  question  which  he  is  not  compelled  to  answer  by  law,  the
answer, if given, would be unfavourable to him;
(i) that when a document creating an obligation is in the hands of the obligor, the obligation has
been discharged.
But the Court shall also have regard to such facts as the following, in considering whether such maxims do or do
not apply to the particular case before it;
as to illustration (a).—a shopkeeper has in his till marked rupee soon after it was stolen, and cannot account for
its possession specifically, but is continually receiving rupees in the course of his business;
as  to  illustration  (b).—A, person of the highest character, is tried for causing a man’s death by an act of
negligence  in  arranging  certain  machinery,  B,  a  person  of  equally  good  character,  who  also  took  part  in  the
arrangement,  describes  precisely  what  was  done,  and  admits  and explains  the  common  carelessness  of  A  and
himself ;
as to illustration (b).—a crime is committed by several persons. A, B and C, three of the criminals, are captured
on the shop and kept apart from each other. Each gives an account of the crime implicating D, and the accounts
corroborate each other in such a manner as to render previous concert highly improbable;
as to illustration (c).—A, the drawer of a bill of exchange, was a man of business. B, the acceptor, was a young
and ignorant person, completely under A’s influence;
as to illustration (d).— It is proved that a river ran in a certain course five years ago, but it is known that there
have been floods since that time which might change its course ;
as  to  illustration (e).—a  judicial  act,  the  regularity  of  which  is  in  question,  was  performed  under  exceptional
circumstances ;
as to illustration (f).—the question is, whether a letter was received. It is shown to have been posted, but the usual
course of the post was interrupted by disturbances;
as to illustration (g).—a man refuses to produce a document which would bear on a contract of small importance
on which he is sued, but which might also injure the feelings and reputation of his family;
as to illustration (h). —a man refuses to answer a question which he is not compelled by law to answer, but the
answer to it might cause loss to him in matters unconnected with the matter in relation to which it is asked ;
as to illustration (i).— a bond is in possession of the obligor, but the circumstances of the case are such that he
may have stolen it.
Page 53 of 59
CHAPTER X
OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESS
130. Order of production and examination of witnesses.— The order in which witnesses are
produced and examined shall be regulated by the law and practice for the time being relating to civil and criminal
procedure respectively, and, in the absence of any such law, by the discretion of the Court.
131. Judge  to  decide  as  to  admissibility  of  evidence.—(1)  When  either  party  proposes to  give
evidence of any fact, the Judge may ask the party proposing to give the evidence in what manner the alleged fact,
if proved, would be relevant, and the Judge shall admit the evidence if he thinks that the fact, if proved, would be
relevant and not otherwise.
(2) If the fact proposed to be proved is one of which evidence is admissible only upon proof of some
other fact, such last-mentioned fact must be proved before evidence is given of the fact first- mentioned, unless
the party undertakes to give proof of such fact, and the Court is satisfied with such undertaking.
(3) If the relevancy of one alleged fact depends upon another alleged fact being first proved, the Judge
may,  in his  discretion,  either  permit  evidence  of the  first fact to  be  given  before  the  second fact is  proved,  or
require evidence to be given of the second fact before evidence is given of the first fact.
Illustrations
(a) It is proposed to prove a statement about a relevant fact by a person alleged to be dead, which
statement is relevant under Article 46.
The fact that the person is dead must be proved by the person proposing to prove the statement,
before evidence is given of the statement.
(b) It is proposed to prove, by a copy, the contents of a document said to be lost.
The fact that the original is lost must be proved by the person proposing to produce the copy,
before the copy is produced.
(c) A is accused of receiving stolen property knowing it to have been stolen.
It is proposed to prove that he denied the possession of the property. The relevancy of the denial
depends on the identity of the property.
The Court may, in its discretion, either require the property to be identified before the denial of
the possession is proved or permit the denial of possession to be proved before the property is
identified.
(d) It is proposed to prove a fact (A) which is said to have been the cause or effect of a fact- in-issue.
There are several intermediate facts (B, C and D) which must be shown to exist before the fact
(A) can be regarded as the cause or effect of the fact-in-issue. The Court may either permit A to
be proved before B, C or D is proved, or may require proof of B, C and D before permitting proof
of A.
132. Examination-in-chief, etc.—(1) The examination of a witness by the party who calls him shall
be called his examination-in-chief.
(2) The examination of a witness by the adverse party shall be called his cross-examination.
Page 54 of 59
(3) The  examination  of  a  witness,  subsequent  to  the  cross-examination  by  the  party  who  called  him,
shall be called his re-examination.
133.  Order  of  examinations.—(1) Witnesses  shall be  first examined-in-chief, then  (if the  adverse
party so desires) cross-examined, then (if the party calling him so desires) re-examined.
(2) The examination and cross-examination must relate to relevant facts but the cross-examination need
not be confined to the facts to which the witness testified on his examination-in-chief.
(3) The re-examination shall be directed to the explanation of matters referred to in cross-examination;
and, if new matter is, by permission of the Court, introduced in re-examination, the adverse party may further
cross-examine that matter.
134. Cross-examination  of  person  called  to  produce  a  document.— A  person  summoned  to
produce a document does not become a witness by the mere fact that he produces it and cannot be cross-examined
unless and until he is called as a witness.
135. Witnesses to character.— Witnesses to character may be cross-examined and reexamined.
136. Leading questions.— Any question suggesting the answer which the person putting it wishes or
expects to receive is called a leading question.
137. When leading questions must not be asked.— (1) Leading questions must not, if objected to
by the adverse party, be asked in an examination-in-chief, or in a re-examination, except with the permission of
the Court.
(2) The Court shall permit leading questions as to matters which are introductory or undisputed, or which
have, in its opinion, been already sufficiently proved.
138. When  leading  questions  may  be  asked.— Leading  questions  may  be  asked  in  cross-
examination.
139. Evidence as to matters in writing.— Any witness may be asked, whilst under examination,
whether any contract, grant or other disposition of property, as to which he is giving evidence, was not contained
in a document, and if he says that it was, or if he is about to make any statement as to the contents of any document,
which, in the opinion of the Court, ought to be produced, the adverse party may object to such evidence being
given until such document is  produced, or until facts have been proved  which entitle the party who called the
witness to give secondary evidence of it.
Explanation.— A witness may give oral evidence of statements made by other persons about the
contents of documents if such statements are in themselves relevant facts.
Illustration
The question is, whether A assaulted B.
C deposes that he heard A say to D—“B wrote a letter accusing me of theft, and I will be revenged on him”. This
statement is relevant, as showing A’s motive for the assault, and evidence may be given of it, though no other evidence is
given about the letter.
140. Cross-examination  as  to  previous  statements  in  writing.— A  witness  may  be  cross-
Page 55 of 59
examined  as  to  previous  statements  made  by  him in writing or reduce into  writing, and  relevant to matters  in
question, without such writing being shown to him, or being proved; but, if it is intended to contradict him by the
writing, his attention must, before the writing can be proved, be called to those parts of it which are to be used
for the purpose of contradicting him.
141. Questions  lawful  in  cross-examination.— When  a  witness  is  cross-examined,  he  may,  in
addition to the questions hereinbefore referred to, be asked any questions which tend—
(1) to test his veracity,
(2) to discover who he is and what is his position in life, or
(3) to  shake  his  credit,  by  injuring  his  character,  although  the  answer  to  such  questions  might  tend
directly or indirectly to criminate him or might expose or tend directly or indirectly to expose him to a penalty or
forfeiture.
142. When witness to be compelled to answer.— If any such question relates to a matter relevant
to the suit or proceeding, the provisions of Article 15 shall apply thereto.