[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

QSO Section 14: Production  of  documents  which  another  person,  having  possession,  could  refuse  to

produce.— No one shall be compelled to produce documents in his possession, which any other person would
be entitled to refuse to produce if they were in his possession, unless such last-mentioned person consents to their
production.
15. Witness not excused from answering on ground that answer will criminate.— A
witness shall not be excused from answering any question as to any matter relevant to the matter in issue in any
suit or in any civil or criminal proceedings, upon the ground that the answer to such question will criminate, or
may tend directly or indirectly to criminate, such witness, or that it will expose, or tend directly or indirectly to
expose, such witness to a penalty or forfeiture of any kind:
Provided that no such answer, which a witness shall be compelled to give, shall subject him to any arrest
or  prosecution,  or  be  proved  against  him  in  any  criminal  proceeding,  except  a  prosecution  for  giving  false
evidence by such answer.
16. Accomplice.— An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person, except in
the case of an offence punishable with hadd; and a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the
13
uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice.
17. Competence and number of witnesses. — (1) The competence of a person to testify, and the
number of witnesses required in any case shall be determined in accordance with the injunctions of Islam as laid
down in the Holy Quran and Sunnah.
(2) Unless otherwise provided in any law relating to the enforcement of Hudood or any other special
law, —
(a) in  matters  pertaining  to  financial  or  future  obligations,  if  reduced  to  writing,  the
instrument shall be attested by two men, or one man and two women, so that one may
remind the other, if necessary, and evidence shall be led accordingly ; and
(b) in all other matters, the Court may accept, or act on, the testimony of one man or one
woman or such other evidence as the circumstances of the case may warrant.
CHAPTER III
OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
18. Evidence may be given of facts in issue and relevant facts.— Evidence may be given in any
suit or proceeding of the existence or non-existence of every fact in issue and of such other facts as are hereinafter
declared to be relevant, and of others.
Explanation. — This Article shall not enable any person to give evidence of a fact which he is disentitled
to prove by any provision of the law for the time being in force relating to Civil Procedure.
Illustrations
(a) A is tried for the murder of B by beating him with a club with the intention of causing his death.
At A’s trial the following facts are in issue —
A’s beating B with the club;
A’s causing B’s death by such beating;
A’s intention to cause B’s death.
(b) A suitor does not bring with him and have in readiness for production at the first hearing of the case, a
bond on which he relies. This Article does not enable him to produce the bond or prove its contents at a
subsequent stage of the proceedings, otherwise than in accordance with the conditions prescribed by the
law for the time being in force relating to Civil Procedure.
19. Relevancy of facts forming part of some transaction.— Facts which though not in issue, are
so connected with a fact in issue as to form part of the same transaction, are relevant, whether they occurred at
the same time and place or at different times and places.
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of the murder of B by beating him. Whatever was said or done by A or B or the by-standers
at the beating, or, so shortly before or after it as to form part of the transaction, is a relevant fact.
(b) A is accused of waging war against Pakistan by taking part in an armed insurrection in which property is
14
destroyed, troops are attacked, and goals are broken open. The occurrence of these facts is relevant, as
forming part of the general transaction, though A may not have been present at all of them.
(c) A sues B for a libel contained in a letter forming part of a correspondence. Letters between the parties
relating to the subject out of which the libel arose, and forming part of the correspondence in which it is
contained, are relevant facts, though they do not contain the libel itself.
(d) The question is, whether certain goods ordered from B were delivered to A. The goods were delivered to
several Intermediate persons successively. Each delivery is a relevant fact.
20. Facts  which  are  the  occasion,  cause  or  effect  of  facts  in  issue.— Facts  which  are  the
occasion, cause or effect, immediate or otherwise, of relevant facts, or facts in issue, or which constitute the state
of things under which they happened, or which afforded an opportunity for their occurrence or transaction, are
relevant.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A robbed B.
The facts that, shortly before the robbery, B went to a fair with money in his possession, and that
he showed it or mentioned the fact that he had it, to third person, are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A murdered B.
Marks  on  the  ground,  produced  by  a  struggle  at  or  near  the  place  where  the  murder  was
committed, are relevant facts.
(c) The question is, whether A poisoned B.
The state of B’s health before the symptoms ascribed to poison, and habits of B, known to A,
which afforded an opportunity for the administration of poison, are relevant facts.
21. Motive, preparation and previous or subsequent conduct.— (1) Any fact is relevant which
shows or constitutes a motive or preparation for any fact in issue or relevant fact.
(2) The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party, to any suit or proceeding, in reference to such
suit or proceeding, or in reference to any fact in issue therein or relevant thereto, and the conduct of any person
an offence against whom is the subject of any proceeding, is relevant, if such conduct influences or is influenced
by any fact in issue or relevant fact, and whether it was previous or subsequent thereto.
Explanation  1. — The  word  “conduct”  in  this  clause  does  not  include  statements,  unless  those
statements accompany and explain acts other than statements but this explanation is not to affect the relevancy of
statements under any other Article of this Order.
Explanation 2. —When the conduct of any person is relevant, any statement made to him or in his
presence and hearing, which affects such conduct, is relevant.
Illustrations
(a) A is tried for the murder of B.
The facts that A murdered C, that B knew that A had murdered C, and that B had tried to extort
money from A by threatening to make his knowledge public, are relevant.
15
(b) A sues B upon a bond for the payment of money, B denies the making of the bond.
The  fact  that,  at  the  time  when  the  bond  was  alleged  to  be  made,  B  required  money  for  a
particular purpose, is relevant.
(c) A is tried for the murder of B by poison the fact that, before the death of B, A procured poison
similar to that which was administered to B, is relevant.
(d) The question is whether a certain document is the will of A.
The facts that, not long before the date of the alleged will A made inquiry into matters to which
the provisions of the alleged will relate, that he consulted advocates in reference to making the
will,  and that he  caused drafts of other  wills to be  prepared of which he  did not approve, are
relevant.
(e) A is accused of a crime.
The  facts  that,  either  before  or  at  the  time  of,  or after  the  alleged  crime,  A  provided  evidence
which would tend to give to the facts of the case an appearance favourable to himself, or that he
destroyed or concealed evidence or prevented the presence or procured the absence of persons
who  might  have  been  witnesses,  or  suborned  persons  to  give  false  evidence  respecting  it,  are
relevant.
(f) The question is whether A robbed B.
The facts that, after B was robbed, C said in A’s presence;
“the Police are coming to look for the man who robbed B”, and that immediately afterwards A
ran away, are relevant.
(g) The question is whether A owes B rupees 10,000.
The facts that A asked C to lend him money, and that D said to C in A’s presence and hearing:
“I advise you not to trust A, for he owes B 10,000 rupees”, and that A went away without making
any answer, are relevant facts.
(h) The question is, whether A committed a crime.
The facts that A absconded after receiving a letter warning him that inquiry was being made for
the criminal, and the contents of the letter, are relevant.
(i) A is accused of a crime.
The facts that, after the commission of the alleged crime, he absconded, or was in possession of
property or the proceeds of property acquired by the crime, or attempted to conceal things which
were or might have been used in committing it, are relevant.
(j) The question is whether A was ravished.
The  facts  that,  shortly  after  the  alleged  rape,  she  made  a complaint  relating  to  the  crime,  the
circumstances under which, and the terms in which, the complaint was made are relevant.
The fact that, without making a complaint, she said, that she had been ravished is not relevant as
16
conduct  under  this  Article  though  it  may  be  relevant  as  a  dying  declaration  under  Article  46
paragraph (1), or as corroborative evidence under Article 153.
(k) The question is, whether A was robbed.
The  fact  that,  soon after the  alleged robbery, he made a complaint relating to the offence, the
circumstances under which, and the terms in which, the complaint was made, are relevant.
The  fact  that  he  said  he  had  been  robbed  without  making  any  complaint,  is  not  relevant,  as
conduct  under  this  Article,  though  it  may  be  relevant  as  a dying  declaration  under  Article  46
paragraph (1), or as corroborative evidence under Article 153.
22.  Facts  necessary  to  explain  or  introduce  relevant  facts.— Facts  necessary  to  explain  or
introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which support or rebut an inference suggested by a fact in issue or
relevant fact, or which establish the identity of anything or person whose identity is relevant, or fix the time or
place at which any fact in issue or relevant fact happened, or which show the relation of parties by whom any
such fact was transacted, are relevant in so far as they are necessary for that purpose.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether a given document is the will of A.
The state of A’s property and of his family at the date of the alleged will may be relevant facts.
(b) A sues B for a libel imputing disgraceful conduct to A; B affirms that the matter alleged to be
libellous is true.
The position and relations of the parties at the time when the libel was published may be relevant
facts as introductory to the facts in issue.
The particulars of a dispute between A and B about a matter unconnected with the alleged libel
are irrelevant, though the fact that there was a dispute may be relevant if it affected the relations
between A and B.
(c) A is accused of a crime.
The fact that, soon after the commission of the crime, A absconded from his house, is relevant
under Article 21, as conduct subsequent to and affected by facts in issue.
The fact that at the time when he left home he had sudden and urgent business at the place to
which he went is relevant, as tending to explain the fact that he left home suddenly.
The details of the business on which he left are not relevant, except in so far as they are necessary
to show that the business was sudden and urgent.
(d) A sues B for inducing C to break a contract of service made by him with A.
C, on leaving A’s service, says to A “I am leaving you because B has made me a better offer”.
This statement is a relevant fact as explanatory of C’s conduct, which is relevant as a fact in
issue.
(e) A, accused of theft, is seen to give the stolen property to B, who is seen to give it to A’s wife. B,
says as he delivers it: “A says you are to hide this.” B’s statement is relevant as explanatory of
a fact which is part of the transaction.
17
(f) A is tried for a riot and is proved to have marched at the head of a mob. The cries of the mob are
relevant as explanatory of the nature of the transaction.
23.  Things  said  or  done  by  conspirator  in  reference  to  common  design.— Where there  is
reasonable  ground  to  believe  that  two  or  more  persons  have  conspired  together  to  commit  an  offence  or  an
actionable  wrong  anything  said,  done  or  written  by  any  one  of  such  persons  in  reference  to  their  common
intention, after the time when such intention was first entertained by any one of them, is a relevant fact as against
each of the persons believed to be so conspiring, as well for the purpose of proving the existence of the conspiracy
as for the purpose of showing that any such person was a party to it.
Illustrations
Reasonable ground exists for believing that A has joined in a conspiracy to wage war against Pakistan.
The facts that B procured arms in Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C collected money in Peshawar for a
like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in Karachi, E published writings advocating the object in view at
Multan, and F transmitted from Lahore to G at Kabul the money which C had collected at Peshawar and contents of a letter
written by H giving an account of the conspiracy are each relevant, both to prove the existence of the conspiracy, and to
prove A’s complicity in it, although he may have been ignorant of all of them, and although the persons by whom they were
done were strangers to him and although they may have been taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it.
24.  When  facts  not  otherwise  relevant  become  relevant.— Facts  not  otherwise  relevant  are
relevant—
(1) if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact;
(2) If by themselves or in connection with other facts they make the existence or nonexistence of any
fact in issue or relevant fact highly probable or improbable.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A committed a crime at Peshawar on a certain day. The fact that, on
that day, A was at Lahore is relevant.
The fact that, near the time when the crime was committed, A was at a distance from the place
where it was committed, which would render it highly improbable, though not impossible, that
he committed it, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A committed a crime.
The  circumstances are  such that the crime must have been committed either by A, B, C, or D.
Every fact which shows that the crime could have been committed by no one else and that it was
not committed by either B, C or D, is relevant.