[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

CPC Section 2: And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by

such sale shall be paid into Court
and shall be duly applied (after deduction there-from of the expenses of the
sale) in payment of the amount payable to the defendant under the aforesaid
preliminary decree and under any further orders that may have been passed in this
suit and in payment of any amount which the Court may have adjudged due to the
defendant for such costs of this suit including the costs of this application and
such costs, charges and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together
with the subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of
the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if
any, shall be paid to the plaintiff or other persons entitled to receive the same.
______ No. 7F
FINAL DECREE IN A SUIT FOR FORECLOSURE, SALE OR REDEMPTION
WHERE THE MORTGAGOR PAYS THE AMOUNT OF THE DECREE.
( Order XXXIV, rules 3, 5 and 8 )
(Title)
This suit coming on this day for further consideration and it appearing that on the
day of
the mortgagor or, the same being a person entitled to redeem, has paid into
Court all amounts due to the mortgagee under the preliminary decree dated the day
of , It is hereby ordered and decreed that :-
(i)  The mortgagee do execute a deed of reconveyance of the
property in the aforesaid preliminary decree mentioned in favour of the mortgagor
1
[or, as the case may be, who has redeemed the property] or an acknowledgment
of the payment of the amount due in his favour;
(ii)  The mortgaged do bring into Court all documents in his
possession and power relating to the mortgaged property in the suit.
And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, upon the mortgagee
executing the deed of reconveyance or acknowledgment in the manner aforesaid,-
(i)  The said sum of Rs.     be paid out of Court to the mortgagee;
(ii)  the said deeds and documents brought into the Court be delivered out
of Court to the mortgagor
2
[or the person making the payment] and the mortgagee
1
Words not required to be deleted.
2
Words not required to be deleted.
do, when so required, concur in registering, at the cost of the mortgagor
1
[or other
person making the payment], the said deed of reconveyance or the
acknowledgment in the office of the Sub-Registrar of ;and
(iii)
2
[if the mortgagee, plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be, is in
possession of the mortgaged property] that the mortgagee do forthwith deliver
possession of the mortgaged property in the aforesaid preliminary decree
mentioned to the mortgagor
3
[or such person as aforesaid who has made the
payment].
______ No. 8
DECREE AGAINST MORTGAGOR PERSONALLY FOR BALANCE AFTER
THE SALE OF THE MORTGAGED PROPERTY.
(Order XXXIV, rules 6 and 8A)
(Title)
Upon reading the application of the mortgagee (the plaintiff or defendant, as the
case may be) and reading the final decree passed in the suit on the day of
and the Court being satisfied that the net proceeds of the sale held under
the aforesaid final decree amounted to Rs. and have been paid to the applicant
out of the Court on the                  day of                 and that the balance now due to
him under the aforesaid decree is Rs.
And whereas it appears to the Court that the said sum is legally recoverable
from the mortgagor (plaintiff, or defendant, as the case may be) personally;
It is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:
__
That the mortgagor (plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be) do pay to the
mortgagee (defendant or plaintiff, as the case may be) the said sum of Rs.
with further interest at the rate of six per cent. per annum from the day
of (the date of payment out of Court referred to above) up to the date of
realization of the said sum, and the costs of this application.
_______ No. 9
PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR FORECLOSURE OR SALE
[Plaintiff .. .. .. .. .. 1st Mortgagee
Defendant No. 1         ..                 ..                  ..                .. Mortgagor.
Defendant No. 2         ..                 ..                  ..                .. 2nd Mortgagee.]
(Order XXXIV, rules 2 and 4) (Title)
The suit coming on this day, etc.; it is hereby declared that the amount due to
the plaintiff on the mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to thisday of is
the sum of Rs. for principal, the sum of Rs.                  for the interest on the
said principal, the sum of Rs.             for costs, charges and expenses (other than
the costs of the suit) incurred by the plaintiff in respect of the
1
Words not required to be deleted.
2
Words not required to be deleted.
3
Words not required to be deleted.
mortgage-security with interest thereon and the sum of Rs.                for the costs of
this suit awarded to the plaintiff, making in all, the sum of Rs.
(Similar declarations to be introduced with, regard to the amount due to
defendant No.2 in respect of his mortgage if the mortgage-money due
thereunder has become payable at the date of the suit).