[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

QSO Section 154: What  matters  may  be  proved  in  connection  with  proved  statement  relevant  under

Article  46  or  47.— Whenever any  statement, relevant under Article  46 or 47, is  proved, all matters may be
proved either in order to contradict or corroborate it, or in order to impeach or confirm the credit of the person by
whom it was made, which might have been proved if that person had been called as a witness and had denied
upon cross-examination the truth of the matter suggested.
155. Refreshing  memory.—(1)  A  witness  may,  while  under  examination,  fresh  his  memory  by
referring to any writing made by himself at the time of the transaction concerning which he is questioned, or so
soon afterwards that the Court considers it likely that the transaction was at that time fresh in his memory
(2) The witness may also refer to any such writing made by any other person, and read by the witness
within the time aforesaid, if when he read if he knew it to be correct.
(3) Whenever  a  witness  may  refresh  his  memory  by  reference  to  any  document,  he  may,  with  the
permission of the Court, refer to a copy of such document:
Provided the Court be satisfied that there is sufficient reason for the non-production of the original.
(4) An expert may refresh his memory by reference to professional treaties.
156. Testimony to facts stated in document mentioned in Article 155.— A witness may also
testify  to  facts  mentioned  in  any  such  document  as  is  mentioned  in  Article  155,  although  he  has  no  specific
recollection of the facts themselves, if he is sure that the facts were correctly recorded in the document.
Page 59 of 59
Illustration
A book-keeper may testify to facts recorded by him in books regularly kept in the course of business, if he knows
that the books were correctly kept, although he has forgotten the particular transactions entered.
157. Right of adverse party as to writing used to refresh memory.— Any writing referred to
under the provisions of the two last preceding Articles must be produced and shown to the adverse party if he
requires its, such party may, if he pleases, cross-examine the witness thereupon.
158. Production of documents.—(1) A witness summoned to produce a document shall, if it is in
his possession or power, bring it to Court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be to its production or
to its admissibility. The validity of any objection shall be decided on by the Court.
(2) The court, if it sees fit, may inspect the document, unless it refers to matters of State, or take other
evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility.
(3) If for such a purpose it is necessary to cause any document to be translated, the Court may, if it thinks
fit, direct the translator to keep the  contents  secret, unless  he  document is  to be given  in evidence; and, if the
translator disobeys such direction, he shall be held to have committed an offence under section 166 of the Pakistan
Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860).
159. Giving,  as  evidence,  of  document  called  for  and  produced  on  notice.— When  a  party
calls for a document which he has given the other party notice to produce, and such document is produced and
inspected by the party calling for its production, he is bound to give it as evidence if the party producing it requires
him to do so.
160. Using, as evidence, of document production of which was refused on notice.— When a
party refuses to produce a document which he has had notice to produce, he cannot afterwards use the document
as evidence without the consent of the other party or the order of the Court.
Illustration
A sues B on an agreement and gives B 3 notice to produce it.
At the trial A calls for the document and B refuses to produce it. A gives secondary evidence of its contents. B seeks
to produce the document itself to contradict the secondary evidence given by A, or in order to show that the agreement is
not stamped. He cannot do so.
161. Judge’s power to put questions or order production.— The Judge may, in order to discover
or to obtain proper proof of relevant facts, ask any question he pleases, in any form, at any time, of any witness,
or of the parties about any fact relevant or irrelevant; and may order the production of any document or thing;
and neither the parties nor their agents shall be entitled to make any objection to any such question or order, nor,
without the leave of the Court, to cross-examine any witness upon any answer given in reply to any such question:
Provided  that  the  judgment  must  be  based  upon facts  declared  by  this  Order  to be  relevant, and  duly
proved:
Provided also that this Article shall not authorise any Judge to compel any witness to answer any question
or to produce any document which such witness would be entitled to refuse to answer or produce under Articles
4 to 14, both inclusive, if the question were asked or the document were called for by the adverse party; nor shall
the judge ask any question which it would be improper for any other person to ask under Article 143 or 144; nor
shall he dispense with primary evidence of any document, except in the cases hereinbefore excepted.
Page 60 of 59
CHAPTER XI
OF IMPROPER ADMISSION AND REJECTION OF EVIDENCE
162. No new trial for improper admission or rejection of evidence.—The improper admission
or rejection of evidence shall not be ground of itself for a new trial or reversal of any decision in any case, if it
shall appear to the Court before which such objection is raised that, independent of the evidence objected to and
admitted, there was sufficient evidence to justify the decision, or that, if the rejected evidence had been received,
it ought not to have varied the decision.
CHAPTER XII
DECISION OF CASE ON THE BASIS OF OATH
163. Acceptance or denial of claim on oath.—(1) When the plaintiff takes oath in support of his
claim, the Court shall, on the application of the plaintiff, call upon the defendant to deny the claim on oath.
14
(2) The Court may pass such orders as to costs and other matters as it may deem fit
(3) Nothing in this Article applies to laws relating to the enforcement of Hudood or other criminal
cases.
CHAPTER XIII
MISCELLANEOUS
164.
17
[Production of evidence that has become available because of modern devices or
information system, etc.— Depending on the  nature of case and circumstances, the Court may, if
deem appropriate, allow to be produced any evidence or witnesses recorded by the Court through the
modern devices or techniques including video call, viber, skype, imo, whatsapp, facebook messenger,
line caller and video conference, etc."]
2
[Provided that conviction on the basis of modern devices or techniques may be lawful.]
165. Order to override other laws.— The provisions of this Order shall have effect
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force.
166. Repeal.— The Evidence Act, 1872 (I of 1872), is hereby repealed.
15 16
'Subs. for the word “full stop” by Act No. IV of 2017, s.5.
16
Added new proviso, ibid.
17
subs by federal act No. XXXVII of 2023 S. 12