[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

CPC Section 43: Execution of decrees passed by British Courts in places to which

this Part does not extend or in foreign territory.– Any decree passed by a
Civil Court established in any
3
[area in Pakistan] to which the provisions relating to
1
S. 42 was renumbered as sub-section (1) of that section by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, 1962 (44 of
1962), s. 10.
2
Added ibid.
3
The original words “part of British India” were amended by the Central Laws (Statute Reform) Ordinance, 1960 (XXI of 1960),
assented  to  by  the  President  on 7  June  1960  and  published in  Gazette  of Pakistan (Extraordinary),  dated:  9 June  1960,  pp.
725-845,  s.  3  read  with  the  Second  Schedule:  it  came  into  force  on  14  October  1955.  They  were  earlier  amended by
the
Adaptation  of  Central  Acts  and  Ordinances  Order,  1949  (G.G.O.  No.  4  of  1949),  published  in  the  Gazette  of  Pakistan
(Extraordinary), dated: 28 March 1949, pp. 223-283, Article 3 read with the Schedule.
execution do not extend,
1
[* * *] may, if it cannot be executed within the
jurisdiction of the Court by which it was passed, be executed in manner herein
provided within the jurisdiction of any Court in
2
[Pakistan].
3
[44. Execution of decrees passed by Courts of
4
[Acceding States].–* *   ]
5
[44-A. Execution  of  decrees  passed  by  Courts  in  the  reciprocating  territory.–
(1)  Where  a  certified  copy  of  a  decree  of  any  of  the  Superior  Courts  of  the
reciprocating territory has been filed in a District Court, the decree may be executed
in Pakistan as if it had been passed by the District Court.
(2) Together with the certified copy of the decree shall be filed a certificate
from  such  superior  Court  stating  the  extent,  if  any,  to  which  the  decree  has  been
satisfied  or  adjusted  and  such  certificate  shall,  for  the  purposes  of  proceedings
under  this  section,  be  conclusive  proof  of  the  extent  of  such  satisfaction  or
adjustment.
(3) The provisions of section 47 shall as from the filing of the certified copy
of the decree apply to the proceedings of a District Court executing a decree under
this section, and the District Court shall refuse execution of any such decree, if it is
shown  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Court  that  the  decree  falls  within  any  of  the
exceptions specified in clauses (a) to (f) of section 13.
Explanation 1. “Reciprocating territory” means such country or territory
as  the  Federal  Government  may,  from  time  to  time,  by  notification  in  the  official
Gazette,  declare  to  be  reciprocating  territory  for  the  purposes  of  this  section;  and
“superior Courts”, with reference to any such territory, means such Courts as may be
specified in the said notification.
Explanation 2. “Decree”, with reference to a superior Court, means any
decree or judgment of such Court under which a sum of money is payable, not being
a sum payable in respect of taxes or other charges of a like nature or in respect of a
fine or other penalty, and does not include an arbitration award, even if such award
is enforceable as a decree or judgment.]
6
[45. Execution of decrees in foreign territory.– * * * * *   ]
46. Precepts.–
(1) Upon the application of the decree-holder the Court which
passed the decree may, whenever it thinks fit, issue a precept to any other Court
which would be competent to execute such decree to attach any property
belonging to the judgment-debtor and specified in the precept.
1
The words “or by Court established or continued by the authority of the Federal Government in any Acceding State,” were
omitted by the Federal Laws (Revision and Declaration) Ordinance, 1981 (XXVII of 1981), published in the Gazette of Pakistan
(Extraordinary) dated: 8 July 1981, pp.345-475, s. 3 read with the Second Schedule.
2
Substituted for the words "the Provinces and the Capital of the Federation" by the Central Laws (Statute Reform) Ordinance,
1960 (XXI of 1960), assented to by the President on 7 June 1960 and published in Gazette of Pakistan (Extraordinary), dated:
9  June  1960,  pp.  725-845,  s.  3  read  with  the  Second  Schedule:  it  came  into  force  on  14  October  1955.  They  were  earlier
substituted for the words "British India" by
the Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinances Order, 1949 (G.G.O. No. 4 of 1949),
published in the Gazette of Pakistan (Extraordinary), dated: 28 March 1949, pp. 223-283, Article 3 read with the Schedule.
3
Omitted  by  the  Federal  Laws  (Revision  and  Declaration)  Ordinance,  1981  (XXVII  of  1981),  published  in  the  Gazette  of
Pakistan (Extraordinary) dated: 8 July 1981, pp.345-475, s. 3 read with the Second Schedule.
4
5
Substituted by the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure  (Punjab  Amendment)  Act  2018  (XIV  of  2018),  published  in  the  Punjab  Gazette
(Extraordinary), dated: 20 March 2018, pp. 6695-6698, s. 11. Inserted by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1937
(VIII of 1937). s. 2.
6
Omitted by  the  Federal  Laws  (Revision  and  Declaration)  Ordinance,  1981  (XXVII  of  1981),  published  in  the  Gazette  of
Pakistan (Extraordinary) dated: 8 July 1981, pp.345-475, s. 3 read with the Second Schedule.
(2) The Court to which a precept is sent shall proceed to attach the
property in the manner prescribed in regard to the attachment of property in
execution of a decree:
Provided that no attachment under a precept shall continue for more than
two months unless the period of attachment is extended by an order of the Court
which passed the decree or unless before the determination of such attachment
the decree has been transferred to the Court by which the attachment has
been made and the decree-holder has applied for an order for the sale of such
property.
QUESTIONS TO BE DETERMINED BY COURT EXECUTING DECREE
47. Questions to be determined by the Court executing decree.–
(1)
All questions arising between the parties to the suit in which the decree was
passed, or their representatives, and relating to the execution, discharge or
satisfaction of the decree, shall be determined by the Court executing the decree
and not by a separate suit.
(2) The Court may, subject to any objection as to limitation or jurisdiction,
treat a proceeding under this section as a suit or a suit as a proceeding and may,
if necessary, order payment of any additional court-fees.
(3) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is not the
representative of a party, such question shall, for the purposes of this section, be
determined by the Court.
Explanation.–
For the purposes of this section, a plaintiff whose suit has
been dismissed and a defendant against whom a suit has been dismissed, are
parties to the suit.
LIMIT OF TIME FOR EXECUTION
48. Execution barred in certain cases.–
(1) Where an application to
execute a decree not being a decree granting an injunction has been made, no
order for the execution of the same decree shall be made upon any fresh
application presented after the expiration of
1
[six years] from
__
(a) the date of the decree sought to be executed, or,
(b) where the decree or any subsequent order directs any
payment of money or the delivery of any property to be made
at a certain date or at recurring periods, the date of the
default in making the payment or delivery in respect of
which the applicant seeks to execute the decree.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed
__
(a) to preclude the Court from ordering the execution of a
decree upon an application presented after the expiration of
the said term of
2
[six years], where the judgment-debtor has,
by fraud or force, prevented the execution of the decree at
1
Substituted for the words “twelve years” by the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972 (XII of 1972), s. 2 read with the Schedule.
2
Ibid.
some time within
1
[six years ]immediately before the date of
the application;or
(b) to limit or otherwise affect the operation of article
2
[183 of
the First Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1908 (IX of 1908)].
TRANSFEREES AND LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
49. Transferee.– Every transferee of a decree shall hold the same subject
to the equities (if any) which the Judgment-debtor might have enforced against the
original decree-holder.
50. Legal representative.–
(1) Where a judgment-debtor dies before the
decree has been fully satisfied, the holder of the decree may apply to the Court
which passed it to execute the same against the legal representative of the
deceased.
(2) Where the decree is executed against such legal representative, he
shall be liable only to the extent of the property of the deceased which has come
to his hands and has not been duly disposed of; and, for the purpose of
ascertaining such liability, the Court executing the decree may, of its own
motion or on the application of the decree-holder, compel such legal
representative to produce such accounts as it thinks fit.
PROCEDURE IN EXECUTION
51. Powers of Court to enforce execution.– Subject to such conditions
and limitations as may be prescribed, the Court may, on the application of the
decree-holder, order execution of the decree
__
(a) by delivery of any property specifically decreed;
(b) by attachment and sale or by sale without attachment of any
property;
(c) by arrest and detention in prison;
(d) by appointing a receiver; or
(e) in such other manner as the nature of the relief granted may require[:]
3
[Provided that,
4
[* * * * * * * * *] execution by detention in prison shall not be
ordered unless, after giving the judgment-debtor an opportunity of showing cause
why he should not be committed to prison, the Court, for reasons recorded in
writing, is satisfied
__
(a) that the judgment-debtor, with the object or effect of obstructing or
delaying the execution of the decree.–
1
Ibid.
2
Substituted for the expression “180 of the Second Schedule to the Indian Limitation Act, 1877" by the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 1940 (XXXIV of 1940) s. 3.
3
Inserted by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1936 (XXI of 1936), s. 2.
4
The  words  and comma  “where  the  decree  is for the  payment  of money,”  were  omitted  by the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1980 (X of 1980), s. 4.
(i) is likely to abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction of
the Court, or
(ii) has, after the institution of the suit in which the decree
was passed, dishonestly transferred, concealed, or removed
any part of his property, or committed any other act of bad
faith in relation to his property ; or
(b) that the judgment-debtor has, or has had since the date of the
decree, the means to pay the amount of the decree or some
substantial part thereof and refuses or neglects or has refused or
neglected to pay the same, or
(c) that the decree is for a sum for which the judgment debtor
was bound in a fiduciary capacity to account.
Explanation.–
In the calculation of the means of the judgment-debtor for the
purposes of clause (b), there shall be left out of account any property which, by
or under any law or custom having the force of law for the time being in force, is
exempt from attachment in execution of the decree.]
52. Enforcement of decree against legal representative.–
(1) Where a
decree is passed against a party as the legal representative of a deceased
person, and the decree is for the payment of money out of the property of the
deceased, it may be executed by the attachment and sale of any such property.
(2) Where no such property remains in the possession of the
judgment-debtor and he fails to satisfy the Court that he has duly applied such
property of the deceased as is proved to have come into his possession, the
decree may be executed against the judgment-debtor to the extent of the
property in respect of which he has failed so to satisfy the Court in the same
manner as if the decree had been against him personally.
53. Liability of ancestral property.– For the purposes of section 50 and
section 52, property in the hands of a son or other descendant which is liable
under Hindu law for the payment of the debt of a deceased ancestor, in respect
of which a decree has been passed, shall be deemed to be property of the
deceased which has come to the hands of the son or other descendant as his legal
representative.
54. Partition of estate or separation of share.– Where the decree is
for the partition of an undivided estate assessed to the payment of revenue
to
1
[the Government], or for the separate possession of a share of such an
estate, the partition of the estate or the separation of the share shall be made by
the Collector or any gazetted subordinate of the Collector deputed by him in this
behalf, in accordance with the law (if any) for the time being in force relating to
the partition, or the separate possession of shares, of such estates.
1
The  original words  “the  Government”  were  amended by  the  Central  Laws  Adaption  Order,  1961  (P.O.  No.  1  of  1961),
published in the Gazette of Pakistan (Extraordinary), dated 24 January 1961, pp.102-174, Article 2 read with the Schedule: it
came  into  force  on  23  March  1956. They  were  earlier  substituted by  the  Government  of  India  (Adaptation  of  Indian  Laws)
Order,  1937,  published  in  the  Gazette  of  India  (Extraordinary),  dated:  1  April  1937,  pp.  75-344,  Article  3  read  with  the  First
Schedule.
ARREST AND DETENTION
55. Arrest and detention.–
(1) A judgment-debtor may be arrested in
execution of a decree at any hour and on any day, and shall, as soon as
practicable, be brought before the Court,
1
[which may make an order for his
detention in prison to suffer simple imprisonment for a period not exceeding one
year]:
Provided, firstly, that, for the purpose of making an arrest under this
section, no dwelling-house shall be entered after sunset and before sunrise:
Provided, secondly, that no outer door of a dwelling-house shall be
broken open unless such dwelling-house is in the occupancy of the
judgment-debtor and he refuses or in any way prevents access thereto, but
when the officer authorized to make the arrest has duly gained access to
any dwelling-house, he may break open the door of any room in which he
has reason to believe the judgment-debtor is to be found:
Provided, thirdly, that, if the room is in the actual occupancy of a
woman who is not the judgement-debtor and who according to the customs of
the country does not appear in public, the officer authorized to make the arrest
shall give notice to her that she is at liberty to withdraw, and, after allowing a
reasonable time for her to withdraw and giving her reasonable facility for
withdrawing, may enter the room for the purpose of making the arrest:
Provided, fourthly, that, where the decree in execution of which a
judgment-debtor is arrested, is a decree for the payment of money and the
judgment-debtor pays the amount of the decree and the costs of the arrest to the
officer arresting him, such officer shall at once release him.
(2) The
2
[Provincial Government] may, by notification in the
3
[official
Gazette], declare that any person or class of persons whose arrest might be
attended with danger or inconvenience to the public shall not be liable to arrest in
execution of a decree otherwise than in accordance with such procedure as may
be prescribed by the
4
[Provincial Government] in this behalf.
5
[(3) A judgment-debtor detained in prison under sub-section (1) shall
not, merely by reason of undergoing such imprisonment, be discharged from his
liability under the decree, but he shall not be liable to be re-arrested under the
decree in execution of which he was so detained in prison.]