[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

CPC Section 34: Decree for execution of document, or endorsement of negotiable

instruments.
_
(1) Where a decree is for the execution of a document or for the
endorsement of a negotiable instrument and the judgment-debtor neglects or
refuses to obey the decree, the decree-holder may prepare a draft of the
document or endorsement in accordance with the terms of the decree and
deliver the same to the Court.
(2) The Court shall thereupon cause the draft to be served on the
judgment-debtor together with a notice requiring his objections  (if any) to be
made within such time as the Court fixes in this behalf.
1
Inserted by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1923(29of 1923).
2
Substituted ibid., for “shall not be executed by detention in prison”.
3
The words “and the decree­holder is the wife” were omitted by  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure  (Amendment) Act,  1923  (29  of
1923).
(3) Where the judgment-debtor objects to the draft, his objections shall
be stated in writing within such time, and the Court shall make such order
approving or altering the draft, as it thinks fit.
(4) The decree-holder shall deliver to the Court a copy of the draft with
such alterations (if any) as
the Court may have directed upon the proper stamp-paper if a stamp is required by
the law for the time being in force; and the Judge or such officer as may be
appointed in this behalf shall execute the documents so delivered.
(5) The execution of a document or the endorsement of a negotiable
instrument under this rule may be in the following form, namely:-
"C.D., Judge of the Court of (or as the case may be), for A. B., in a suit by E.F.
against A.B.", and shall have the same effect as the execution of the document or
the endorsement of the negotiable instrument by the party ordered to execute or
endorse the same.
(6) The Court, or such officer as it may appoint in this behalf, shall
cause the document to be registered if its registration is required by the law for
the time being in force or the decree-holder desires to have it registered, and
may make such order as it thinks fit as to the payment of the expenses of the
registration.