[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

CPC Section 1: Withdrawal of suit or abandenment of part of claim

_
(1) At any time
after the institution of a suit the plaintiff may, as against all or any of the
defendants, withdraw his suit or abandon part of his claim.
(2) Where the Court is satisfied
__
(a) that a suit must fail by reason of some formal defect, or
(b) that there are other sufficient grounds for allowing the plaintiff to
institute a fresh suit for the subject-matter of a suit or part of a claim.
it may, on such terms as it thinks fit, grant the plaintiff permission to withdraw
from such suit or abandon such part of a claim with liberty to institute a fresh
suit in respect of the subject-matter of such suit or such part of a claim.
(3) Where the plaintiff withdraws from a suit, or abandons part of a
claim, without the permission referred to in sub-rule (2), he shall be liable for
1
Substituted by the LawReforms Ordinance, 1972(12of 1972), s.2and Sch., for the Originalrule 9.
2
Sub-rule (3) added by the CivilProcedure (Amendment) Act, 1990(4of 1990), s.2.
such costs as the Court may award and shall be precluded from instituting any
fresh suit in respect of such subject-matter or such part of the claim.
(4) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to authorise the Court to permit
one of several plaintiffs to withdraw without the consent of the others.
2. Limitation law not affected by first suit. In any fresh suit instituted on
permission granted under the last preceding rule, the plaintiff shall be bound by the
law of limitation in the same manner as if the first suit had not been instituted.
3. Compromise of suit. Where it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court
that a suit has been adjusted wholly or in part by any lawful agreement or
compromise, or where the defendant satisfies the plaintiff in respect of the whole or
any part of the subject-matter of the suit, the Court shall order such agreement,
compromise or satisfaction to be recorded, and shall pass a decree in accordance
therewith so far as it relates to the suit.
4. Proceedings in execution of decrees not affected. Nothing in this Order
shall apply to any proceedings in execution of a decree or order.
ORDER XXIV
PAYMENT INTO COURT