[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://punjabcode.punjab.gov.pk/uploads/articles/THE_CODE_OF_CIVIL_PROCEDURE,_1908.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

CPC Section 32: Decree for specific performance for restitution of conjugal rights,

or for an injunction.
_
(1) Where the party against whom a decree for the
specific performance of a contract, or for restitution of conjugal rights, or for an
injunction, has been passed, has had an opportunity of obeying the decree and
has willfully failed to obey it, the decree may be enforced
2
[in the case of a decree
for restitution of conjugal rights by the attachment of his property or, in the
case of a decree for the specific performance of a contract or for an injunction]
by his detention in
3
[* *] prison, or by the attachment of his property, or by both.
(2) Where the party against whom a decree for specific performance or
for an injunction has been passed is a corporation, the decree may be
enforced by the attachment of the property of the corporation, or, with the
leave of the Court, by the detention in
4
[* *] prison of the directors or other
principal officers thereof, or by both attachment and detention.
(3) Where any attachment under sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) has
remained in force for one year, if the judgment-debtor has not obeyed the decree
and the decree-holder has applied to have the attached property sold, such
property may be sold ; and out of the proceeds the Court may award to the
decree- holder such compensation as it thinks fit, and shall pay the balance (if
any) to the judgment-debtor on his application.
(4) Where the judgment debtor has obeyed the decree and paid all
costs of executing the same which he is bound to pay, or where, at the end of
one year from the date of the attachment, no application to have the property
sold has been made, or if made has been refused, the attachment shall cease.
(5) Where a decree for the specific performance of a contract or for
an injunction has not been obeyed, the Court may, in lieu of or in addition to all or
any of the processes aforesaid, direct that the act required to be done may be
1
Ibid.
2
Inserted by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1923(29of 1923), s.2.
3
The words “the civil” were omitted by the Civil Laws (Reforms) Act, 1994 ( XIV of 1994); assented to by the President on 27
July 1994; and, was published in the Gazette of Pakistan (Extraordinary), dated: 31 July 1994, pp. 683-688, s. 11.
4
Ibid.
done so far as practicable by the decree-holder or some other person appointed
by the Court, at the cost of the judgment-debtor and upon the act being done the
expenses incurred may be ascertained in such manner as the Court may direct
and may be recovered as if they were included in the decree.
Illustration
A, a person of little substance, erects a building which renders uninhabitable a
family mansion belonging to B. A, in-spite of his detention in prison and the
attachment of his property, declines to obey a decree obtained against him by B
and directing him to remove the building. The Court is of opinion that no sum
realizable by the sale of A's property would adequately compensate B for the
depreciation in the value of his mansion. B may apply to the Court to remove
the building and may recover the cost of such removal from A in the
execution-proceedings.