[AUTO-EXTRACTED — verify against source before treating as authoritative]
Source: https://sja.gos.pk/assets/Acts_Ordinances_Rules2/QANUN-E-SHAHADAT.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-08-12

QSO Section 63: Opinion as to usage, tenets, etc, when relevant: when the Court has to form an opinion as

to—
the usages and tenets of any body of men or family, the constitution and government of any religious or
charitable foundation, or
the meaning of words to terms used in particular districts or by particular classes of people.
The opinions of persons having special means of knowledge thereon, are relevant facts.
64. Opinion on relationship when relevant.— When the Court has to form an opinion as to the
relationship of one person to another, the opinion, expressed by conduct, as to the existence of such relationship,
of any person who, as a member of the family or otherwise, has special means of knowledge on the subject, is a
relevant fact:
Provided that such opinion shall not be sufficient to prove a marriage in proceedings under the Divorce
Act, 1869 (IV of 1869), or in prosecutions under Section 494 or 495 of the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of
1860).
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A and B were married.
The  fact  that  they  were  usually  received  and  treated  by  their  friends  as  husband and  wife,  is
relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A was the legitimate son of B. The fact that A was always treated as
such by members of the family, is relevant.
65. Grounds of opinion when relevant.— Whenever the opinion of any living person is relevant,
the grounds on which such opinion is based are also relevant.
Illustration
An expert may give an account of experiments performed by him for the purpose of forming his opinion.
CHARACTER WHEN RELEVANT
66. In civil cases character to prove conduct imputed irrelevant.— In civil cases the fact that
the character of any person concerned is such as to render probable or improbable any conduct imputed to him
is irrelevant, except in so far as such character appears from facts otherwise relevant.
67. In criminal cases previous good character relevant.— In criminal proceedings the fact that
the person accused is of a good character is relevant.
68. Previous bad character not relevant, except in reply.— In criminal proceedings the fact
that  the  accused  person  has  a  bad  character  is  irrelevant,  unless  evidence  has  been  given  that  he  has  a  good
character, in which case it become relevant.
Page 33 of 59
Explanation 1.— This Article does not apply to cases in which the bad character of any person is itself
a fact in issue.
Explanation 2.—A previous conviction is relevant as evidence of bad character.
69. Character as affecting damages.— In civil cases the fact that the character of any person is
such as to affect the amount of damages which he ought to receive, is relevant.
Explanation:— In Articles 66, 67, 68 and 69, the word “character” includes both reputation and
disposition; but, except as provided in Article 68, evidence may be given only of general reputation and general
disposition, and not of particular acts by which reputation or disposition were shown.
Page 34 of 59
CHAPTER IV
OF ORAL EVIDENCE
70. Proof of facts by oral evidence. — All facts, except the contents of documents, may be proved
by oral evidence.
71. Oral evidence must be direct.— Oral evidence must, in all cases whatever be direct, that is to
say—
If it refers to a fact which could be seen, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he saw it;
If it refers to a fact which could be heard, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he heard it;
If it refers to a fact which could be perceived by any other sense or in any other manner, it must be the
evidence of a witness who says he perceived it by that sense or in that manner;
If it refers to an opinion or to the grounds on which that opinion is held, it must be the evidence of the
person who holds that opinion on those grounds:
Provided  that  the  opinions  of  experts  expressed  in  any  treaties  commonly  offered  for  sale,  and  the
grounds on which such opinions are held, may be proved by the production of such treaties if the author is dead,
or cannot be found, or has become incapable of giving evidence,  or cannot be  called  as  a  witness  without an
amount of delay or expense which the Court regards as unreasonable:
Provided further that, if oral evidence refers to the existence or condition of any material thing other
than a document, the Court may, if it thinks fit, require the production of such material thing for its inspection:
Provided  further  that,  if  a  witness  is  dead,  or  cannot  be  found  or  has  become  incapable  of  giving
evidence,  or  his  attendance  cannot,  be  procured  without  an  amount  of  delay  or  expense  which  under  the
circumstances of the case the Court regards as unreasonable, a party shall have the right to produce, shahada
ala al-shahadah Jl by which a witness can appoint two witnesses to depose on his
behalf, except in the case of Hudood.
CHAPTER V
OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
72. Proof of contents of documents.— The contents of documents may be proved either by primary
or by secondary evidence.
73. Primary evidence.— “Primary evidence” means the document itself produced for the inspection
of the Court.
Explanation 1.—Where a document is executed in several parts, each part is primary evidence of the
document.
Where a document is executed in counterpart, each counterpart being executed by one or some of the
parties only, each counterpart is primary evidence as against the parties executing it.
Explanation 2. —Where a number of documents are all made by one uniform process, as in the case
of printing, lithography or photography, each is primary evidence of the contents of the rest; but where they are
all copies of a common original, they are not primary evidence of the contents of the original.
Page 35 of 59
1
[.Explanation 3.—A printout or other form of output of an automated information system shall not be
denied  the  status  of  primary  evidence  solely  for  the  reason  that  it  was  generated,  sent,  received  or  stored  in
electronic  form  if  the  automated  information  system  was  in  working  order  at  all  material  times  and,  for  the
purposes hereof, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it shall be presumed that the automated information
system was in working order at all material times.
Explanation  4.—A  printout  or  other  form  of  reproduction  of  an  electronic  documents,  other  than  a
document mentioned in Explanation 3 above, first generated, sent, received or stored in electronic form, shall be
treated as primary evidence where a security procedure was applied thereto at the time it was generated, sent,
received or stored.]
Illustration
A person is shown to have been in possession of a number of placards, all printed at one time from one original. Any one
of the placards is primary evidence of the contents of any other, but no one of them is primary evidence of the contents of
the original.
74. Secondary evidence.— “Secondary evidence” means and includes—
(1) certified copies given under the provisions hereinafter contained ;
(2) copies made from the original by mechanical processes which in themselves insure the accuracy of
the copy, and copies compared with such copies ;
(3) copies made from or compared with the original;
(4) counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not execute them ;
(5) oral accounts of the contents of a document given by some person who has himself seen it.
Illustrations
(a) A photograph of an original is secondary evidence of its contents though the two have not been
compared, if it is proved that the thing photographed was the original.
(b) A copy, compared with a copy of a letter made by a copying machine is secondary evidence of
the contents of the letter, if it is shown that the copy made by the copying machine was made
from the original.
(c) A  copy  transcribed  from  a  copy,  but  afterwards  compared  with  the  original,  is  secondary
evidence; but the copy not so compared is not secondary evidence of the original, although the
copy from which it was transcribed was compared with the original.
(d) Neither  an  oral  account  of  a  copy  compared  with  the  original,  nor  an  oral  account  of  a
photograph or machine-copy of the original, is secondary evidence of the original.
75. Proof of documents by primary evidence.— Documents must be proved by primary
evidence except in the cases hereinafter mentioned.
76. Cases in which secondary evidence relating to documents may be given.— Secondary
evidence may be given of the existence, condition or contents of a document in the following cases:—
1
Added “Explanations 3 and 4 in Article 73” by Ord. No. L1 of 2002, s. 29 and schedule
Page 36 of 59
(a) when the original is shown or appears to be in the possession or power of the person
against whom the document is sought to be proved, or of any person out of reach of, or
not subject to, the process of the Court, or of any person legally bound to produce it,
and when, after the notice mentioned in Article 77 such person does not produce it;
(b) when  the  existence,  condition  or  contents  of  the  original  have  been  proved  to  be
admitted in writing by the person against whom it is proved or by his representative in
interest;
(c) when the original has been destroyed or lost, or when the party offering evidence of its
contents  cannot,  for  any  other  reason  not  arising  from  his  own  default  or  neglect,
produce it in reasonable time ;
(d) when,  due  to  the  volume  or  bulk  of  the  original,  copies  thereof  have  been  made  by
means of microfilming or other modern devices ;
(e) when the original is of such a nature as not to be easily movable ;
(f) when the original is public document within the meaning of Article 85 ;
(g) when the original is a document of which a certified copy is permitted by this Order, or
by any other law in force in Pakistan, to be given in evidence ;
(h) when  the  originals  consist  of  numerous  accounts  or  other  documents  which  cannot
conveniently be examined in Court, and the fact to be proved is the general result of the
whole collection ;
(i) when an original document forming part of a judicial record is not available and only a
certified  copy  thereof  is  available,  certified  copy  of  that  certified  copy  shall  also  be
admissible as a secondary evidence.
In cases (a), (c), (d) and (e), any secondary evidence of the contents of the document is
admissible.
In case (b), the written admission is admissible.
In  case  (f)  or  (g),  certified  copy  of  the  document,  but  no other  kind  of  secondary
evidence, is admissible.
In  case  (h), evidence  may be  given  as  to  the  general result  of  the  documents  by  any
person  who  has  examined  them,  and  who  is  skilled  in  the  examination  of  such
document.
77. Rules as to notice to produce.— Secondary evidence of the contents of the documents referred
to in Article 76, paragraph (a), shall not be given unless the party proposing to give such secondary evidence has
previously given to the party in whose possession or power the document is, or to his advocate, such notice to
produce it as is prescribed by Law; and, if no notice is prescribed by law, then such notice as the Court considers
reasonable under the circumstances of the case:
Page 37 of 59
Ins. new article 78A by Ord. No. L1 of 2002, s. 29 and schedule
Provided that such notice shall not be required in order to render secondary evidence admissible in any
of the following cases, or in any other case in which the Court thinks fit to dispense with it: —
(1) when the document to be proved is itself a notice ;
(2) when, from the nature of the case, the adverse party must know that he will be required to produce
it;
(3) when it appears or is proved that the adverse party has obtained possession of the original by fraud
or force ;
(4) when the adverse party or his agent has the original in Court ;
(5) when the adverse party or his agent has admitted the loss of the document ;
(6) when the person in possession of the document is out of reach of, or not subject to, the process of
the Court.